                     A SPECIAL REPORT ON BIG DATA, SOCIAL MEDIA AND POLITICS

MARCH 26TH– APRIL 1ST 2016

America’s profits problem

Time for Dilma to go

Andy Grove: technology titan

Britain’s Tory party turmoil

The vaccination paradox

Europe’s
new normal

Contents

The Economist March 26th 2016 3

35 Apostasy and Islam
Not advised
36 Unrest in Ethiopia
Grumbling and rumbling
36 The press in east Afr ica
Pencil blunted

United States
37 Trump and the world
Don’t deal with it
38 The pr imar ies
Heard on the trail
38 College endowments
Yard sale
39 Deporting child migrants
Self-defence
40 Western pr imar ies
Mormons against the
Donald
41 Haitian-Amer icans
The Creole caucuses
42 Lexington
The meaning of blue jeans

Special report:
Technology and politics
The signal and the noise
Af ter page 42

The Amer icas
44 Brazil’s political cr isis
The president totters
45 Canada’s budget
Globalisation with a
human face
45 Obama in Cuba
A histor ic visit
46 Bello
The drama of Lula

Asia
47 Australian politics
Turnbull’s big gamble
48 Money launder ing in the
Philippines
Walls of silence
48 China and Taiwan
The Gambia gambit
49 South Korea and wartime
sex slaves
Kindred spir its
49 The South China Sea
China v the rest

7 The world this week

Leaders
11 Bombings in Brussels
The new normal
12 Amer ican business
The problem with proﬁts
13 Brazil’s political cr isis
Time to go
14 Reform in rural China
Sell up, move on
14 Welfare cuts
Two-nation Br itain
15 Technology and politics
Bits and ballots

Letters
16 On Amer ican politics,
companies, migrants,
glyphosate, Malaysia,
the semicolon

Br ieﬁng
21 Business in Amer ica
Too much of a good thing

Europe
25 After Brussels
Not again
26 Terror ism in France
The long emergency
27 Turkey and the EU
Migrants and bombs
28 Spain without government
Stuck in the centre
28 What Europeans think
of each other
Happiness envy
29 Charlemagne
Ireland and Brexit

Br itain
30 Fiscal policy
In it together?
31 Brexit br ief
Unfavourable trade winds
32 Bagehot
The divided, ruling Tor ies

Middle East and Afr ica
33 Oil and the Gulf states
Af ter the par ty
34 Yemen
Fighting to a standstill
34 The Kurds
Containing multitudes

Turmoil in Br itain’s Tor y party
Iain Duncan Smith’s ﬂounce
was oppor tunistic, but he is on
to something: leader, page 14.
The balance of tax and welfare
changes is tilting fur ther in
favour of the r ich, page 30.
The split between Iain Duncan
Smith and George Osborne
epitomises their par ty:
Bagehot, page 32

Cr isis in Brazil The time has
come for a tarnished president
to resign: leader, page 13.
Dilma Rousseﬀ’s chances of
remaining in oﬃce are
diminishing by the day, page
44. Lula’s fall from grace:
Bello, page 46. The economy is
crumbling but giant pulp ﬁrms
are booming, page 57

Trump and the world
If Donald Trump wins the
nomination he is likely to ditch
half a centur y of Republican
thinking on foreign policy,
page 37

1

Contents continues overleaf

On the cover
Europe has suﬀered another
ser ies of murderous attacks
by jihadists. They will not be
the last: leader, page 11. After
a top fugitive is arrested,
Islamic State str ikes again,
page 25. France is realising
that its state of emergency
may last a long time, page 26

The Economist online

Daily analysis and opinion to
supplement the pr int edition, plus
audio and video, and a daily char t
Economist.com

E-mail: newsletters and
mobile edition
Economist.com/email

Pr int edition: available online by
7pm London time each Thursday
Economist.com/pr int

Audio edition: available online
to download each Fr iday
Economist.com/audioedition

Volume 418 Number 8982

Published since September 1843
to take par t in "a severe contest between
intelligence, which presses forward, and
an unwor thy, timid ignorance obstructing
our progress."

Editorial oﬃces in London and also:
Atlanta, Beijing, Berlin, Brussels, Cairo, Chicago,
Lima, Mexico City, Moscow, Mumbai, Nairobi,
New Delhi, New York, Par is, San Francisco,
São Paulo, Seoul, Shanghai, Singapore, Tokyo,
Washington DC

4 Contents

The Economist March 26th 2016

Science and technology
70 Clinical tr ials
For my next tr ick...
71 Urban planning
Listen up
71 The sociology of science
In death, there is life
72 Ecology
Pictures of guilly
72 Software engineer ing
Spaghetti code
73 Dermatology
Rainbow’s beginning

Books and arts
74 Splinternet
The evolution of the world
wide web
75 Existentialism
Smokey and the bandits
76 The future of China
Chronicle of a death
foretold
76 International Pop Art
Far and wide
77 Johnson
Noam Chomsky

80 Economic and ﬁnancial
indicators
Statistics on 42 economies,
plus a closer look at
Poland’s per formance in
the OECD

Obituar y
82 Hilar y Putnam
The meaning of meaning

China
51 Urbanisation
Chongqing’s troubled
reforms

International
53 Vaccination
A jab in time
54 HPV vaccines
The cost of embarrassment

Business
55 Digital advertising
Invisible ads, phantom
readers
56 Mobile advertising
Shine, but not r ise
57 Electronics
Taiwan 2.0
57 Pulp producers in Brazil
Money that grows on trees
58 Electr icity in Indonesia
Shock therapy
59 Television
Changing the channel
60 Schumpeter
Andy Grove, the man who
put Intel inside

Finance and economics
61 Asset managers
The tide turns
62 Buttonwood
Inequality v small
government
63 Investing in South Korea
Losing faith
63 Gold in India
A tarnished appeal
64 Kenyan coﬀee
A bitter har vest
67 Chinese economic data
Fudge-ocracy
67 Peer-to-peer lending
A r ipple of fear
68 Free exchange
Markets and the Fed

Proﬁts in Amer ica Big ﬁrms in
the United States have never
had it so good. Time for more
competition: leader, page 12.
The barr iers to entr y
protecting Amer ican business,
pages 21-24

Lessons from Chongqing
Rural residents are largely
shut out of China’s booming
proper ty market. That is a
mistake: leader, page 14.
An ambitious plan for social
change has run into trouble,
page 51

Vaccination paradox 
Some Western countr ies have
lower vaccination rates than
poor par ts of Afr ica.
Anti-vaxxers are not the main
culpr its, page 53. A jab to
ward oﬀ cer vical cancer is
standard for girls. Should boys
have it, too? Page 54

Technology and politics
Social media have made the
world more democratic—for
now: leader, page 15. Easier
communications and big data
are transforming politics, see
our special repor t af ter page
42. How the internet lost its
free spir it, page 74

Subscription service

For our full range of subscription offers,
including digital only or print and digital 
combined, visit
Economist.com/offers
or call the telephone number provided below:
Telephone: +44 (0) 845 120 0983 or
+44 (0) 207 576 8448 

Subscription for 1 year (51 issues)
Print only
Euro-zone countries 
Denmark 
Hungary 
Norway 
Poland 
Sweden 
Switzerland 
Turkey 
Other Europe (ex UK)  

 €229
DKr 1,709
HUF 78,042
NKr 1,839
PLN 1,011
SKr 2,089
SFr 296
TL 814

€229

Middle East – GCC 
South Africa 
Middle East and Africa 

US$352
ZAR 4,670, US$285
US$285

Pr incipal commercial oﬃces:

25 St James’s Street, London sw1a 1hg
Tel: +44 20 7830 7000

Rue de l’Athénée 32
1206 Geneva, Switzerland
Tel: +41 22 566 2470 

750 3rd Avenue, 5th Floor, New York, NY 10017 
Tel: +1 212 541 0500 

1301 Cityplaza Four,
12 Taikoo Wan Road, Taikoo Shing, Hong Kong
Tel: +852 2585 3888

Other commercial oﬃces:
Chicago, Dubai, Frankfur t, Los Angeles,
Par is, San Francisco and Singapore 

PEFC certiﬁed

This copy of The Economist
is pr inted on paper sourced
from sustainably managed
forests cer tiﬁed by PEFC
www.pefc.org

PEFC/04-31-1267

© 2016 The Economist Newspaper Limited. All r ights reser ved. Neither this publication nor any par t of it may be reproduced, stored in a retr ieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or other-
wise, without the pr ior permission of The Economist Newspaper Limited. Published ever y week, except for a year-end double issue, by The Economist Newspaper Limited. The Economist is a registered trademark of The Economist Newspaper Limited. Pr inted by
Vogel Druck und Medienser vice GmbH, Leibnizstraße 5, 97204 Höchberg, Deutschland. France, Numéro Commission Par itaire: 68832 GB. Encar t d’abonnement de deux pages situé entre les folios 10 et 130. Rapp. Italia: IMD srl Via Guido da Velate 11 20162
Milano Aut. Tr ib. MI 272 del 13/04/88 Poste Italiane SpA - Sped Abb Post DL 353/2003 (conv. L. 27/2/2004 n.46) ar t 1 comma 1 DCB Milano, Dir. Resp. Domenico Tassinar i

How do we pass 
on our values?

Will our money make our children’s lives easier?

Or too easy?

Be ing wea lthy can have it s beneﬁt s , and it s 
cha l lenges too.

You’d like your ch ildren to have the bes t 
oppor tunities. And inherit your determination 
and drive. How do you get the balance right?

We can help you pass on something even more 
prec ious . Your va lues . (We’ve been he lp ing 
fam i lies for more than 150 year s . )

For some of life’s questions, you’re not alone. 
Together we can ﬁnd an answer.

The price and value of investments and income derived from them can go down as well as up. You may not get back the amount you originally invested. Past performance is not a 
reliable indicator of future results. In the UK, UBS AG is authorised by the Prudential Regulation Authority and subject to regulation by the Financial Conduct Authority and limited 
regulation by the Prudential Regulation Authority. Issued in Australia by UBS AG ABN 47 088 129 613 (AFSL* No. 231087). *AFSL means holder of Australia Financial Services License. 
© UBS 2016. All rights reserved.

ub s .com / pa s s - on - va lue s

The world this week

Politics

Suicide-bombers attacked the
check-in area at Brussels
international airport and a
train at a metro station, killing
more than 30 people and
injuring hundreds of others.
Belgium declared three days of
national mourning; the au-
thorities carried out raids and a
manhunt. Islamic State
claimed responsibility for the
assault, which came a few
days after the arrest at a ﬂat in
the Belgian capital of Salah
Abdeslam, a suspect in last
November’s attacks in Paris,
which were also claimed by IS. 

Nadia Savchenko, a Ukrai-
nian army pilot accused of
directing artillery ﬁre which
killed two Russian journalists,
was given a 22-year prison
sentence by a Russian court.
Her supporters say the charges
are nonsense and the trial a
farce. Asked if she understood
the sentence, she sang the
Ukrainian national anthem.

The EU agreed to provide €6
billion ($6.8 billion) and politi-
cal concessions, including
accelerated talks on visa-free
travel, in return for Turkey
accepting the return of mi-
grants from Greece. The EU
will instead accept refugees
directly from camps in Turkey.
Separately, a suicide-bombing
in one of Istanbul’s busiest
shopping districts killed four
people. 

Britain’s Conservative Party
was rocked by the resignation
of Iain Duncan Smith as wel-
fare minister; he claimed that
cuts to disability beneﬁts were
“a compromise too far” in a
government budget that fa-

voured higher earners. A
supporter of Brexit, the timing
of his departure has been
questioned. His successor
promptly reversed the cuts,
leaving a £4.4 billion ($6.3
billion) hole in the budget.
George Osborne, the chancel-
lor, saw his future leadership
hopes dashed further as open
rebellion over the budget
broke out within the party. 

Ver y diplomatic
Aung San Suu Kyi, the leader
of Myanmar’s National
League for Democracy, chose
the job of foreign minister in
the new civilian government,
the ﬁrst after 50 years of con-
trol by the army. She will hold
several other portfolios too. Ms
Suu Kyi’s party won an elec-
tion last November, but she
was barred from becoming
president under the army’s
constitutional manoeuvring. 

Jia Jia, a journalist and critic of
the government in China, has
been detained by the authori-
ties, according to his lawyer,
apparently in relation to an
open letter that sharply criti-
cised President Xi Jinping and
called on him to resign. How-
ever, the lawyer says Mr Jia did
not write the letter.

Jakarta, the capital of Indone-
sia, came to a standstill when
taxi drivers and public-tran-
sport workers demonstrated
against ride-hailing apps, such
as Uber. But the march turned
unruly. Some protesters at-
tacked rival taxi cabs and
pulled drivers out of their cars
who did not agree with their
aim of banning app-based
transport services. 

Australia seems to be heading
for an early general election.
Malcolm Turnbull, the prime
minister, surprised the opposi-

tion by recalling Parliament for
a sitting next month to discuss
union reforms that have been
held up in the Senate. 

He has their support, for now
A meeting of the national
executive committee of South
Africa’s ruling party, the Afri-
can National Congress, ex-
pressed conﬁdence in Presi-
dent Jacob Zuma. Some had
predicted that the party would
“recall” Mr Zuma after a series
of damaging allegations of
inﬂuence peddling, which the
party said it would investigate. 

The government in Zimba-
bwe started to investigate the
payment of compensation to
farmers whose land it has
seized illegally. An agreement
to pay compensation is seen as
a necessary ﬁrst step towards
winning debt forgiveness from
Western governments.

Judges from the International
Criminal Court found Jean-
Pierre Bemba, a former Con-
golese vice-president, guilty of
a deliberate campaign of
widespread rapes and killings
that took place in the Central
African Republic a decade ago.
The ruling is the ﬁrst by the ICC
in which it passed a guilty
verdict for rape as an act of
war. Mr Bemba was held to
have had “command responsi-
bility”, even though he did not
take direct part in the acts.

Ayatollah Ali Khamenei,
Iran’s supreme leader, accused
America of acting to block the
sanctions relief promised by
last year’s nuclear deal. The
remaining American non-
nuclear sanctions have de-
terred banks from ﬁnancing
business deals with Iran.

You need hands
Donald Trump went to Wash-
ington to woo an establish-
ment unnerved by the pros-
pect of him winning the
Republican nomination. At a
speech to the American Israel
Public Aﬀairs Committee he
gave assurances that he could
broker a deal between the
Israelis and the Palestinians.
Speaking to the Washington
Post he said that other NATO
members should do more to

The Economist March 26th 2016 7

counter Russian aggression. He
also spoke at length about the
size of his hands. 

The Justice Department said
that “an outside party” had
shown it could unlock the
iPhone used by one of the
assailants in last December’s
terror attack in San Bernardino.
The FBI has asked Apple for
help, but it has refused, arguing
it would undermine its com-
mitment to data privacy. 

Our man in Havana

Barack Obama became the
ﬁrst American president since
1928 to visit Cuba. In a speech
broadcast live on Cuban televi-
sion he said he had come to
“bury the last remnant of the
cold war in the Americas”. He
told Cuba’s Communist presi-
dent, Raúl Castro, he “need not
fear” freedom of speech and
democracy. Mr Obama also
met Cuban dissidents. 

A supreme court judge in
Brazil suspended the appoint-
ment of Luiz Inácio Lula de
Silva, the former president, as
chief of staﬀ to the current
president, Dilma Rousseﬀ.
Lula, who faces investigation
in connection with the scandal
centred on Petrobras, could
only be tried in the supreme
court if he were a member of
the cabinet. Supporters of the
government accused an in-
vestigating judge of breaking
the law by releasing wire-
tapped conversations between
Lula and his associates. 

Rob Ford, a former mayor of
Toronto most famous for hav-
ing been caught on camera
smoking crack cocaine, died
from cancer. He was a popular
mayor who ended a car-regis-
tration tax during his term in
oﬃce from 2010 to 2014.

1

8 The world this week

The Economist March 26th 2016

nies’ bosses when they accom-
panied Barack Obama on his
visit to Cuba. Starwood also
announced that it had struck a
deal with the Cuban govern-
ment to operate hotels on the
island, the ﬁrst American
hotelier to do so since the
revolution in 1959. 

The minutes from the latest
meeting of the Bank of Eng-
land’s policy committee
showed that its members think
uncertainty in the markets
over the outcome of the June
referendum on Britain’s mem-
bership of the European Union
is a “signiﬁcant driver” behind
the fall of the pound. The
central bank, which is oﬃcially
neutral in the Brexit debate,
said the uncertainty was also
causing some businesses to
delay spending decisions. 

In a surprise move, Nigeria’s
central bank raised its bench-
mark interest rate by 1 percent-
age point, to 12%. Nigeria’s
currency, the naira, has been
hurt by the fall in oil prices.
That has helped push up
inﬂation to 11.4%. 

Sepp Blatter, the disgraced
former president, had received
a pay package of $3.7m, the ﬁrst
time it has detailed his
remuneration. 

Fish out of water

Norwegian salmon pr ice

Average € per kg

7

6

5

4

3

2014

15

16

Source: NASDAQ

The price of salmon recov-
ered some of the ground it lost
last year, as prices on the Nor-
wegian market leapt this week;
they are up by over 30% com-
pared with early last year. An
algal bloom has reduced the
output of salmon farms in
Chile, the world’s second-
biggest producer, unnerving
investors. Share prices of
salmon ﬁrms have surged
amid worries over supply;
prices are expected to stay
buoyant in the short-term.

Football’s governing body,
FIFA, posted its ﬁrst annual
loss since 2002, citing
increased development
expenses and higher competi-
tion costs. It also revealed that

Two former executives at
Porsche SE were acquitted by
a court on charges of mis-
leading the markets about
their intention to launch a
takeover of Volkswagen in

2008. VW was not party to the
trial. Porsche SE, a holding
company, is being sued by
investors over the matter,
though the judge in the case
said there was “absolutely
nothing” to the allegations. 

The pilot of a Lufthansa pas-
senger jet reported that a
drone had come within 61
metres (200 feet) of his A380
on its landing approach to Los
Angeles. Hundreds of in-
trusions by drones into planes’
air space have been reported
around the world in the past
few years, but this one was
close. Dianne Feinstein, a
senator who has sponsored a
drone-safety bill, called the
incident “reckless”. 

Left grappling
Terry Bollea, a former wrestler
better known as Hulk Hogan,
pinned down Gawker, a
celebrity-news blog, when he
won an invasion-of-privacy
case over part of a sex tape it
had published. Mr Bollea was
awarded $115m, more than he
had claimed, by a jury in Flori-
da; a further $25m was added
for punitive damages. Gawker
expressed conﬁdence that it
would win with a full submis-
sion on appeal.

Other economic data and news
can be found on pages 80-81

Business

The saga at Valeant rumbled
on. Michael Pearson decided
to quit as chief executive of the
troubled Canadian drugmak-
er. He acknowledged that the
past few months, during
which time the company has
been criticised for introducing
whopping price increases on
heart medicines and has come
under federal investigation for
its ties to an online pharmacy,
have been “diﬃcult”. He will
stay until a successor is named.
The company blamed the
“tone at the top of the organi-
sation” and pressure to
achieve targets as factors caus-
ing it to restate its earnings.
William Ackman, an activist
investor whose hedge fund
owns 9% of Valeant, was ap-
pointed to the board. 

IHS and Markit, two providers
of market and ﬁnancial data,
agreed to merge in a transac-
tion they valued at $13 billion.
IHS is based in Colorado but
will move to London, where
Markit has its headquarters,
thus allowing it to lower its
corporate-tax rate consid-
erably. It is the latest in a series
of “tax inversion” deals that
have attracted political contro-
versy in America. The new IHS
Markit will compete with
Bloomberg and Thomson
Reuters for business. 

Phone home
Apple went back to basics,
unveiling a new iPhone, the SE,
which comes with a smaller
screen than the iPhone 6 and is
billed by the company as the
cheapest iPhone ever. Mean-
while, America’s Supreme
Court agreed to hear Sam-
sung’s appeal against the
penalties it has incurred for
copying Apple’s patented
designs on the iPhone. 

Marriott increased its oﬀer for
Starwood Hotels to $13.6
billion in order to fend oﬀ a
rival bid from Anbang, a Chi-
nese insurance company.
Starwood, which counts the
Sheraton and Westin chains
among its brands, accepted
Marriott’s new deal, which
was discussed by the compa-

Leaders

The new normal

The Economist March 26th 2016 11

Europe has suﬀered another series of murderous attacks by jihadists. They will not be the last
ON THE streets of Brussels
they had been dreading the
next attack. But when Islamic
State (IS) eventually struck, on
March 22nd at Zaventem airport
and then, just over an hour later,
in the city’s metro system, an-
ticipation did nothing to dimin-
ish the shock or the suﬀering. As we went to press, the death
toll was over 30; at least 200 were injured, some of them criti-
cally (see page 25). Belgium’s prime minister, Charles Michel,
called the bombings “blind, violent and cowardly”.
Over the coming days Europe will once again pass through
terrorism’s stages of grief: despair over innocent lives cut short;
anger towards the young men and women (some of them citi-
zens) who kill in the name of jihad; questions about the grip of
the police and intelligence services; and eventually, as news
bulletins and headlines subside, a weary resignation.
Yet even now, immediately after the attack, two lessons are
clear. One is that, despite being at the top of the most-wanted
list for years, IS remains resourceful enough to mount synchro-
nised bombings in the heart of Europe. The other, which ﬂows
from this, is that big cities in Europe and America will have to
get used to a long campaign of terror in which all are targets.

National Front, compares Muslims praying in the street to the
Nazi occupation. Such intolerance helps turn discontents into
sympathisers and radicals into bombers. Equally, IS rejoices
when Western countries dwell on scores of people dying at
home rather than the hundreds of Muslims killed by bombs in
Beirut and Turkey or the millions mouldering in refugee camps
and suﬀering in Syria’s civil war. Policy should aim to split rad-
icals oﬀ, not force the mainstream into their arms.
Another priority—which goes some way to preventing an
overreaction—is to reassure ordinary people that the govern-
ment is working to protect them. Some politicians think that
popular fears of perishing in a terrorist attack are irrational. Ba-
rack Obama, in a recent interview in the Atlantic, explained
how he likes to remind his staﬀ that more Americans die from
falling over in the bath. But terrorism is diﬀerent from acciden-
tal death or even from random murder. The public react to ter-
rorism so strongly because they sense that their government
cannot fulﬁl its basic duty to keep them safe from such ene-
mies. The fear that terrorism provokes is not just a statistical de-
lusion but also an inkling that people who know no limits are
organising a conspiracy against the state.
Asked to oﬀer reassurance without straying into overreac-
tion, governments struggle. France, which has suﬀered griev-
ously in two attacks, is still living under a state of emergency in
which the police can search houses without a warrant and
place suspects under house arrest. President François Hol-
lande and his prime minister still frequently declare that
France is at war. Strong words and the suspension of normal
rights were understandable just after the attacks in November.
They may now be counterproductive (see page 26).

Havens and have nots
IS’s resilience will cause alarm and rightly so. The Brussels
bombers struck days after police arrested Salah Abdeslam, a
chief suspect in last year’s attacks in Paris in which 130 people
died. For four months he had found haven with sympathetic
friends and neighbours just a few streets away from his home
in Molenbeek, a Brussels suburb. Plainly, some people are pre-
pared to endorse Mr Abdeslam’s methods even if they are not
yet ready to dip their own hands in their compatriots’ blood. 
As well as enjoying some support, IS commands expertise
and recruits. Across six European countries 18 jihadists are
known to be under arrest, suspected of a hand in the Paris at-
tacks. Even so, IS could muster enough jihadists to mount a
complex, co-ordinated operation under the nose of the au-
thorities in Brussels, possibly at short notice. French oﬃcials
have concluded that IS has learnt how to make bombs from
commonplace chemicals such as hair dye and nail-polish re-
mover. They have yet to ﬁnd any of the group’s bombmakers
and struggle to penetrate the jihadists’ communications. 
The threat is not about to diminish. Some would-be terro-
rists will be recruited locally. Thousands of men and women
have left Europe for IS’s self-styled caliphate in Syria and Iraq,
where they have received training and indoctrination. Libya is
seething. Al-Qaeda and IS are competing to prove their jihadist
credentials. The near-certainty is of more attacks in more cities.
How should governments respond? The starting point is an
awareness that terrorists set out to provoke an overreaction.
They exult when politicians like Donald Trump vow to ex-
clude Muslims from the United States; when leaders from east-
ern Europe say they will accept migrants from Syria only if
they are Christian; or when Marine Le Pen, leader of the French

Grains of sand
The best protection would be peace in the Middle East—a dis-
tant dream, alas. The coalition has made progress against IS in
its caliphate, which is shrinking and losing people. But eradi-
cating it needs Iraqi troops (as yet unprepared) and ground
forces in Syria (as yet non-existent). Meanwhile, IS’s ability to
command and inspire terrorists will persist and, anyway, the
West has its own, self-radicalised jihadists to deal with.
And so the police and intelligence services need to operate
in every sphere at home, from surveillance to deradicalisation.
One thing that can be ﬁxed quickly is underinvestment. Anti-
quated IT systems hinder collaboration. The security services
also need to penetrate jihadist networks and their supporters,
using human recruits and enhanced signal intelligence. Inter-
agency co-operation has improved, but privacy-protection still
hinders the sharing of data. Jihadists work across borders more
easily than the security services do. (Brexit could well be a fur-
ther obstacle.) Better policing and prisons can help stop petty
criminals being radicalised. The economic and cultural isola-
tion of districts like Molenbeek must end. It is a long, hard toil
and much of it must go on unobserved—except when it fails.
Many will dread the struggle ahead and regret the never-
ending contest between security and liberty. But as long as ji-
hadists threaten the West, there is no escaping the need to act.
Welcome to the new normal. 7

12 Leaders

Business in Amer ica

The problem with proﬁts

The Economist March 26th 2016

Big ﬁrms in the United States have never had it so good. Time for more competition
AMERICA used to be the land
of opportunity and opti-
mism. Now opportunity is seen
as the preserve of the elite: two-
thirds of Americans believe the
economy is rigged in favour of
vested interests. And optimism
has turned to anger. Voters’ fury
fuels the insurgencies of Donald Trump and Bernie Sanders
and weakens insiders like Hillary Clinton. 
The campaigns have found plenty of things to blame, from
free-trade deals to the recklessness of Wall Street. But one pro-
blem with American capitalism has been overlooked: a corro-
sive lack of competition. The naughty secret of American ﬁrms
is that life at home is much easier: their returns on equity are
40% higher in the United States than they are abroad. Aggre-
gate domestic proﬁts are at near-record levels relative to GDP.
America is meant to be a temple of free enterprise. It isn’t.

Borne by the USA
High proﬁts might be a sign of brilliant innovations or wise
long-term investments, were it not for the fact that they are also
suspiciously persistent. A very proﬁtable American ﬁrm has
an 80% chance of being that way ten years later. In the 1990s
the odds were only about 50%. Some companies are capable
of sustained excellence, but most would expect to see their
proﬁts competed away. Today, incumbents ﬁnd it easier to
make hay for longer (see pages 21-24). 
You might think that voters would be happy that their em-
ployers are thriving. But if they are not reinvested, or spent by
shareholders, high proﬁts can dampen demand. The excess
cash generated domestically by American ﬁrms beyond their
investment budgets is running at $800 billion a year, or 4% of
GDP. The tax system encourages them to park foreign proﬁts
abroad. Abnormally high proﬁts can worsen inequality if they
are the result of persistently high prices or depressed wages.
Were America’s ﬁrms to cut prices so that their proﬁts were at
historically normal levels, consumers’ bills might be 2% lower.
If steep earnings are not luring in new entrants, that may mean
that ﬁrms are abusing monopoly positions, or using lobbying
to stiﬂe competition. The game may indeed be rigged.
One response to the age of hyper-proﬁtability would be
simply to wait. Creative destruction takes time: previous epi-
sodes of peak proﬁts—for example, in the late 1960s—ended
abruptly. Silicon Valley’s evangelicals believe that a new era of
big data, blockchains and robots is about to munch away the
fat margins of corporate America. In the past six months the
earnings of listed ﬁrms have dipped a little, as cheap oil has hit
energy ﬁrms and a strong dollar has hurt multinationals. 
Unfortunately the signs are that incumbent ﬁrms are be-
coming more entrenched, not less. Microsoft is making double
the proﬁts it did when antitrust regulators targeted the soft-
ware ﬁrm in 2000. Our analysis of census data suggests that
two-thirds of the economy’s 900-odd industries have become
more concentrated since 1997. A tenth of the economy is at the
mercy of a handful of ﬁrms—from dog food and batteries to air-

lines, telecoms and credit cards. A $10 trillion wave of mergers
since 2008 has raised levels of concentration further. Ameri-
can ﬁrms involved in such deals have promised to cut costs by
$150 billion or more, which would add a tenth to overall pro-
ﬁts. Few plan to pass the gains on to consumers.
Getting bigger is not the only way to squish competitors. As
the mesh of regulation has got denser since the 2007-08 ﬁnan-
cial crisis, the task of navigating bureaucratic waters has be-
come more central to ﬁrms’ success. Lobbying spending has
risen by a third in the past decade, to $3 billion. A mastery of
patent rules has become essential in health care and technol-
ogy, America’s two most proﬁtable industries. And new regu-
lations do not just fence big banks in: they keep rivals out. 
Having limited working capital and fewer resources, small
companies struggle with all the forms, lobbying and red tape.
This is one reason why the rate of small-company creation in
America has been running at its lowest levels since the 1970s.
The ability of large ﬁrms to enter new markets and take on lazy
incumbents has been muted by an orthodoxy among institu-
tional investors that companies should focus on one activity
and keep margins high. Warren Buﬀett, an investor, says he
likes companies with “moats” that protect them from competi-
tion. America Inc has dug a giant defensive ditch around itself. 
Most of the remedies dangled by politicians to solve Ameri-
ca’s economic woes would make things worse. Higher taxes
would deter investment. Jumps in minimum wages would
discourage hiring. Protectionism would give yet more shelter
to dominant ﬁrms. Better to unleash a wave of competition. 
The ﬁrst step is to take aim at cosseted incumbents. Moder-
nising the antitrust apparatus would help. Mergers that lead to
high market share and too much pricing power still need to be
policed. But ﬁrms can extract rents in many ways. Copyright
and patent laws should be loosened to prevent incumbents
milking old discoveries. Big tech platforms such as Google and
Facebook need to be watched closely: they might not be rent-
extracting monopolies yet, but investors value them as if they
will be one day. The role of giant fund managers with cross-
holdings in rival ﬁrms needs careful examination, too.

Set them free
The second step is to make life easier for startups and small
ﬁrms. Concerns about the expansion of red tape and of the reg-
ulatory state must be recognised as a problem, not dismissed
as the mad rambling of anti-government Tea Partiers. The bur-
den placed on small ﬁrms by laws like Obamacare has been
material. The rules shackling banks have led them to cut back
on serving less proﬁtable smaller customers. The pernicious
spread of occupational licensing has stiﬂed startups. Some 29%
of professions, including hairstylists and most medical work-
ers, require permits, up from 5% in the 1950s.
A blast of competition would mean more disruption for
some: ﬁrms in the S&P 500 employ about one in ten Ameri-
cans. But it would create new jobs, encourage more invest-
ment and help lower prices. Above all, it would bring about a
fairer kind of capitalism. That would lift Americans’ spirits as
well as their economy. 7

The Economist March 26th 2016

Brazil’s political cr isis

Time to go

Leaders 13

The tarnished president should now resign
DILMA ROUSSEFF’S diﬃcul-
ties have been deepening
for months. The massive scan-
dal surrounding Petrobras, the
state-controlled oil giant of
which she was once chairman,
has implicated some of the peo-
ple closest to her. She presides
over an economy suﬀering its worst recession since the 1930s,
largely because of mistakes she made during her ﬁrst term. Her
political weakness has rendered her government almost pow-
erless in the face of rising unemployment and falling living
standards. Her approval ratings are barely in double digits and
millions of Brazilians have taken to the streets to chant “Fora
Dilma!”, or “Dilma out!” 
And yet, until now, Brazil’s president could fairly claim that
the legitimacy conferred by her re-election in 2014 was intact,
and that none of the allegations made against her justiﬁed her
impeachment. Like the judges and police who are pursuing
some of the most senior ﬁgures in her Workers’ Party (PT), she
could declare with a straight face her desire to see justice done. 
Now she has cast away that raiment of credibility (see page
44). On March 16th Ms Rousseﬀ made the extraordinary deci-
sion to appoint her predecessor, Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva, to be
her chief of staﬀ. She portrayed this as a shrewd hire. Lula, as he
is known to all, is a canny political operator: he could help the
president survive Congress’s attempt to impeach her and per-
haps even stabilise the economy. But just days before, Lula had
been brieﬂy detained for questioning at the order of Sérgio
Moro, the federal judge in charge of the Petrobras investigation
(dubbed lava jato, or “car wash”), who suspects that the former
president proﬁted from the bribery scheme (see page 46). Pros-
ecutors in the state of São Paulo have accused Lula of hiding
his ownership of a beach-front condominium. He denies these
charges. By acquiring the rank of a government minister, Lula
would have partial immunity: only the country’s supreme
court could try him. In the event, a judge on the court has sus-
pended his appointment.
This newspaper has long argued that either the judicial sys-
tem or voters—not self-serving politicians trying to impeach
her—should decide the president’s fate. But Ms Rousseﬀ’s hir-
ing of Lula looks like a crass attempt to thwart the course of jus-
tice. Even if that was not her intention, it would be its eﬀect.
This was the moment when the president chose the narrow in-
terests of her political tribe over the rule of law. She has thus
rendered herself unﬁt to remain president.

Three ways to leave the Planalto
How she exits the Planalto, the presidential palace, matters
greatly. We continue to believe that, in the absence of proof of
criminality, Ms Rousseﬀ’s impeachment is unwarranted. The
proceeding against her in Congress is based on unproven alle-
gations that she used accounting trickery to hide the true size
of the budget deﬁcit in 2015. This looks like a pretext for ousting
an unpopular president. The idea, put forward by the head of
the impeachment committee, that congressmen deliberating

Ms Rousseﬀ’s fate will listen to “the street”, would set a worry-
ing precedent. Representative democracies should not be gov-
erned by protests and opinion polls.
There are three ways of removing Ms Rousseﬀ that rest on
more legitimate foundations. The ﬁrst would be to show that
she obstructed the Petrobras investigation. Allegations by a PT
senator that she did so may now form the basis of a second im-
peachment motion, but they are so far unproven and she de-
nies them; Ms Rousseﬀ’s attempt to shield Lula from prosecu-
tion may provide further grounds. A second option would be a
decision by Brazil’s electoral court to call a new presidential
election. It may do that, if it ﬁnds that her re-election campaign
in 2014 was ﬁnanced with bribes channelled through Petro-
bras executives. But this investigation will be drawn out. The
quickest and best way for Ms Rousseﬀ to leave the Planalto
would be for her to resign before being pushed out. 
Her departure would oﬀer Brazil the chance of a fresh start.
But the president’s resignation would not, of itself, solve Bra-
zil’s many underlying problems. Her place would initially be
taken by the vice-president, Michel Temer, leader of the Party
of the Brazilian Democratic Movement. Mr Temer could head a
national-unity government, including opposition parties,
which, in theory, might be able to embark on the ﬁscal reforms
needed to stabilise the economy and close a budget deﬁcit that
is close to 11% of GDP. 
Sadly, Mr Temer’s party is as deeply enmeshed in the Petro-
bras scandal as the PT. Many politicians who would join a un-
ity government, including some from the opposition, are pop-
ularly seen as representatives of a discredited ruling class. Of
Congress’s 594 members, 352 face accusations of criminal
wrongdoing. A new presidential election would give voters an
opportunity to entrust reforms to a new leader. But even this
would leave the rotten legislature in place until 2019. 
The judiciary, too, has questions to answer. Judges deserve
great credit for holding Brazil’s mightiest businessmen and pol-
iticians to account, but they have undermined their cause by
ﬂouting legal norms. The latest example is Mr Moro’s decision
to release recorded telephone conversations between Lula
and his associates, including Ms Rousseﬀ. Most jurists believe
that only the supreme court may divulge conversations in
which one of the parties has legal immunity, as the president
does. This does not justify the claim from government suppor-
ters that the judges are staging a “coup”. But it makes it easy for
lava jato suspects to divert attention from their own misdeeds
to the blunders of their pursuers. 
Brazil’s war of parties and personalities obscures some of
the most important lessons of the crisis. Both the Petrobras
scandal and the economic crash have their origins in miscon-
ceived laws and practices that are decades old. Getting Brazil
out of its mess requires wholesale change: controlling public
spending, including on pensions; overhauling growth-crush-
ing tax and labour laws; and reforming a political system that
encourages corruption and weakens political parties. 
These can no longer be put oﬀ. Those chanting “Fora
Dilma!” on the streets would claim victory if she was ousted.
But for Brazil itself to win it would be just the ﬁrst step. 7

14 Leaders

The Economist March 26th 2016

Reform in rural China

Sell up, move on

Rural residents are largely shut out of China’s booming property market. That is a mistake
CHINA’S great lift-oﬀ began
more than three decades
ago in the countryside, when
the Communist Party began
loosening the rules it had used
to ensure that farmers stayed in
their villages and produced food
at the party’s behest.
Under Maoist madness, farmers were corralled into “peo-
ple’s communes” where they toiled in abject poverty and
sometimes extreme hunger. But from the late 1970s, farmers
gradually gained yearned-for freedoms: to farm their own
plots of land and sell their produce privately, and eventually to
move into cities to work in factories. These changes were a lib-
eration; they helped to transform the country from basket case
to economic powerhouse. But they did not go far enough. The
remaining vestiges of Maoist control are deeply unfair and
hold back the country’s economic development at a time of
slowing growth. China needs a new wave of reform.

Chongqing is one of the few places that has put much eﬀort
into creating a rural property market (see page 51). It has also
turned many migrants into full urban citizens, with hukou pa-
pers to prove it. But both experiments have run into obstacles.
One is the colossal cost of building aﬀordable housing for mi-
grants, and of providing them with access to the same public
services as everyone else. Another problem is that farmers still
cannot trade their property freely; the rural-land market set up
in Chongqing has beneﬁted only a few of them.
Rather than tinker with incremental reform, it is time for
China both to scrap the pernicious hukou system, and give
farmers full rights to the land they live on and till. That means
letting them proﬁt by selling their houses, a right that urban
residents have enjoyed since the 1990s. It also means that rural
dwellers must give up their claim to be allocated land, free of
charge, to use for farming and the building of homesteads. Ru-
ral land rights should be privatised; just as urban land rights
have been privatised in all but name.
The government worries that farmers might sell everything
and rush into cities, creating shantytowns ﬁlled with landless,
jobless migrants who could pose a threat to stability. The party
is wrong to fret. It is evident that many farmers would not sell
up impetuously. Fearful of losing land rights, and with them a
guarantee of somewhere to go if life goes awry in the cities, mi-
grants often do not take up urban hukou even when oﬀered it.
At the same time millions of farmers have already been forced
oﬀ their land with little or no compensation by China’s relent-
less urban expansion. They have not created vast slums nor,
despite their many protests, have they threatened stability.
Many in the party also believe that “collective” ownership
of rural land is a sacred legacy of Mao, that, for all his mistakes,
was created with noble intent. But the president, Xi Jinping,
says that market forces should play a “decisive role” in China.
Let that be so in the countryside, as much as in the cities. 7

Twin shackles
Farmers still cannot freely trade the land they use or the
houses they own. And if they do move to cities, many of them
are still shut out of subsidised urban public services, such as
health care and education, simply because of their rural ori-
gins. For a country that sees middle-class spending as a vital
source of future growth, these problems bode ill. They limit
the ability of hundreds of millions of people to join the urban
middle-class. And they create a dangerous social divide: the
250m or so who have already moved into urban areas are of-
ten treated as second-class citizens. Their household-registra-
tion papers, or hukou, still classify many as “peasants”.
The Communist Party admits these problems need ﬁxing.
But it has been slow to reform. The south-western region of

Welfare cuts

Two-nation Britain

Iain Duncan Smith’s ﬂounce was opportunistic, but he is on to something
WHEN Iain Duncan Smith
resigned on March 18th in
protest at curbs to disability
beneﬁts, eyes in Westminster
rolled. How odd for the man
who has run the Department for
Work and Pensions (fairly in-
competently) for the past six
years to turn on his own policies. How transparently his ani-
mus towards George Osborne, the chancellor of the exche-
quer, motivated his accusations. How conveniently these bol-
stered Mr Duncan Smith’s complaints, as a pro-Brexit
campaigner, about an aloof and elitist Europhile establish-

ment. “Disappointed” by the resignation and using sturdier
language privately, a red-faced David Cameron went before
his MPs in the House of Commons on March 21st to oﬀer his re-
tort and conﬁrm that the disability cuts would not go ahead.
He also reminded them of his government’s “one nation”
achievements, including falling inequality, soaring employ-
ment and school reform.
Mr Duncan Smith’s motives may be dubious and his com-
plaint oﬀ-target (the proposed disability cuts were less egre-
gious than some others). But he has stumbled on something
that matters. The budget was regressive, cutting welfare as it re-
duced income tax for the top 15% of earners and capital-gains
taxes mostly paid by the asset-rich (see page 30). Ministers say

1

The Economist March 26th 2016

Leaders 15

2

that a forthcoming increase in the minimum wage compen-
sates for the cuts. In fact it most beneﬁts middling households
(since its recipients often support a higher-earning partner)
and is part of a wider post-election tilt towards the better oﬀ.
According to one estimate, changes announced since the Con-
servatives won a majority last year will leave the average an-
nual income of the top 30% of households £280 ($400) higher
and that of the bottom 30% £565 lower. Meanwhile the jobs en-
gine is slowing, wage growth is faltering and the wealthiest are
roaring ahead. The fall in inequality over the previous parlia-
ment will probably be wiped out over the course of this one.
Blame politics. The Conservatives won the election partly
by pledging a rush to budget surplus through welfare cuts so
stringent that the Labour Party could not bring itself to match
them. It also promised to ring-fence sensitive budgets like hos-
pitals, schools and foreign aid, and committed to a “triple
lock”, increasing the state pension by the rate of inﬂation, earn-
ings growth or 2.5% a year, whichever is greatest. Such prom-
ises have left Mr Osborne with little option but to dip into the
pockets of poorer, younger Britons who, conveniently, are less
likely to vote. And with a divisive EU referendum looming in
June, local Tory associations in revolt and a leadership election

on the horizon (see Bagehot), no minister wants to sting the
plump, grey Conservative base. The Labour Party may have
trooped into the left-wing wilderness under Jeremy Corbyn,
but the centrist overtures with which the prime minister has
recently wooed the opposition’s more moderate supporters
have been conﬁned to safe schemes like improving mental
health and sprucing up sink estates.

Fools to the left, jokers to the right
This newspaper cheers politicians who reduce dependency
and sharpen the incentives to work, as the Tories have. We re-
cognise the need to be mindful of Britain’s deﬁcit, which some
in Labour appear to disregard. But as long as the country’s belt-
tightening disproportionately squeezes the worse-oﬀ, there
will be a hole in the prime minister’s “one nation” rhetoric. If
he wins the EU vote, Mr Cameron will face few threats and,
having pledged to step down by 2020, no more general elec-
tions. He should use that freedom to spring the pensions “tri-
ple lock”, ease cuts to working-age beneﬁts and release his
party from the rigid promise to be in surplus by 2020. Today,
swathes of the centre ground are vacant. The country would
be better oﬀ if the Conservatives did more to seize it. 7

Technology and politics

Bits and ballots

12

13

14

0

15

300

200

100

400

2010 11

Twitter
Monthly active users, m

Social media have made the world more democratic—for now
THE world’s ﬁrst tweet was as
dull as they come. “Just set-
ting up my twttr,” wrote Jack
Dorsey, now Twitter’s chief ex-
ecutive, on March 21st 2006. Ten
years after that
inauspicious
start, Twitter’s 320m monthly
users send hundreds of millions
of tweets a day. However cloudy the ﬁrm’s current prospects,
and however trivial many of those tweets may be, Twitter is
part of a wider communications revolution. As this week’s
special report shows, the internet has distributed more politi-
cal power to citizens. But new technologies also carry risks. 
Initial scepticism about the political impact of social media
has faded. With the advent of the smartphone, messaging
apps and video-streaming services, Twitter and other social
platforms have become central to all kinds of collective action.
They let like-minded people quickly ﬁnd one another. They
make it easy to get the message out and to mobilise the masses.
And they allow nascent protest movements to function with-
out leaders or formal organisations, to begin with at least. 
All this is to be welcomed. Twitter and other social media
have made the world a more democratic place. They give voice
and power to people who have neither—and not just in auto-
cratic countries. Social media turbo-charged anti-austerity
movements such as the indignados in Spain. More recently,
they helped get Black Lives Matter, a movement ﬁghting vio-
lence against African-Americans, oﬀ the ground. 
But technology is never purely good or bad—it always cuts
both ways. Social media also facilitate more troubling kinds of
activism: xenophobic groups in Germany and Islamic State
both make extensive use of such platforms, for example. And

even as social-media services democratise political move-
ments, the data they carry can also concentrate power in per-
nicious ways.
Online campaigns leave a big digital footprint that can be
analysed, often in real time. Again, Twitter is a good example:
those with access to its millions of tweets can map networks of
activists, analyse what they are talking about and identify the
most inﬂuential. This ﬂood of digital information is a bonanza
for intelligence agencies and, especially, for autocratic regimes.
Both can use social media as a tool for surveillance. True, citi-
zens can use encryption to protect themselves from the eye of
the state. But greater secrecy also makes media less social, and
political campaigns harder to organise. 

Power to the algorithm
Access to data can concentrate power in the hands of private
entities, too. Political campaigns, particularly in America, have
long harnessed electoral data to identify supporters who need
a nudge to get out to vote or who may be convinced to change
their mind. Thanks to social media, voters can now be targeted
with ever more precision. Facebook, for instance, allows politi-
cal organisations to upload lists of voters and inject tailored
ads into their newsfeeds. That might exacerbate political polar-
isation, by further walling oﬀ voters from diﬀerent views. And
such digital campaigns do not come cheap, handing an advan-
tage both to those ﬁrms that sit on most data and to those can-
didates with most ﬁnancial resources.
The original vision of the internet, as a self-governing
cyber-Utopia, has long since been consigned to history (see
page 74). But it remains a public good. The danger is that the
centralisation of data may undo many of the democratic gains
that social media and other technologies have brought. 7

16

Letters

The party’s over

Your assessment of the frac-
tious condition of America’s
political parties concluded that
“it is impossible to imagine a
big democracy staying healthy
without them” (“The party
declines”, March 5th). But the
current state of many large
democracies suggests exactly
the contrary. The polarisation
of politics in America; the
entrenchment of party whips
in Britain; complete dysfunc-
tion in Italy; and institution-
alised corruption and class
prejudice in India: all of these
result from the misplaced
importance accorded to
political parties.
America’s Founding
Fathers focused on repre-
sentation, not parties. This
year’s presidential race shows
how the parties have become
so out-of-step with that ideal.
The parties now represent the
various interest groups they
have cobbled together to justi-
fy their existence and have
become part of the “estab-
lishment”, whose raison d’être
is self-preservation. It is little
wonder that voters are swayed
more by the superﬁcial emo-
tional appeal of simple anti-
establishment rhetoric than by
serious consideration of the
issues facing the country.
Where, for example, is the
debate on the role of education
when it come to competing
with the surging skills of India
and China? Where is the seri-
ous analysis of how best to
return the economy to surplus
and manage the crushing
burden of national debt on
generations to come?
Ultimately voters get the
representatives they vote for.
Sadly, too few give too little
thought to this crucial right
and duty.

MIKE RAVEN

Buﬀalo, New York

Stay out of the limelight

Projecting statesmanship may
be necessary for some busi-
ness leaders (Schumpeter,
February 27th), but not if there
is something rotten in the
overall state of the company.
We have found that, during the
economic slump of 2007-10,

those chief executives who
were the media face of their
company while simultaneous-
ly being connected with other
issues of public interest, fared
worst as business leaders. The
market capitalisation of their
companies shrank the most.
Companies where market
capitalisation contracted the
least had CEOs who, relative to
their peers, played the smallest
role in the media coverage of
their business, and were also
hardly linked to any other
public issue.

GREGOR HALFF

Professor of corporate
communication practice
Singapore Management
University

Migrants in Germany

It is absurd to claim that in
Germany “suddenly foreign-
ers are in schools, swimming
pools and hospitals” (Charle-
magne, March 5th). In 2014,
before the million refugees
arrived, more than 20% of the
German population had a
foreign background. We have
lived together for a long time in
the real world, not in some
1950s fairy tale.
In this refugee crisis a large
number of Germans (and
foreigners) have displayed a
can-do attitude that is the
opposite of what you describe
as people withdrawing to
private life. That said, it is right
that the inﬂux has polarised
society and that political
debate is becoming more
aggressive.

MICHAEL MEYER-RESENDE

Executive director
Democracy Repor ting
International
Berlin

Regulating glyphosate

You stated that regulators in
Europe “are arguing over the
safety of glyphosate, the
world’s top weedkiller” (“Fog
of uncertainty”, March 5th).
Although some politicians
might be arguing about gly-
phosate, no pesticide regulator
in the world considers it to be a
carcinogen. In November 2015,
the European Food Safety
Authority concluded that
“Glyphosate is unlikely to pose

a carcinogenic hazard to hu-
mans.” And in April 2015, the
Canadian regulator found that
“the overall weight of evidence
indicates that glyphosate is
unlikely to pose a human
cancer risk.” Also last year,
America’s Environmental
Protection Agency reaﬃrmed
that glyphosate is not an
endocrine disrupter.
Glyphosate’s renewal is up
for a vote by the European
Commission, and it is no sur-
prise that this process has
sparked political debate. Much
of the debate centres on a
classiﬁcation by a working
group of the International
Agency for Research on
Cancer, even though it is not a
regulatory authority.
Regulators depend on
science and an informed pub-
lic to make the best decisions
for all of us.

PHILIP MILLER

Vice-president, global regu-
lator y and governmental aﬀairs
Monsanto
St Louis, Missour i

The state of Malaysia

Many Malaysians barely recog-
nise the country that you
described in “The Najib eﬀect”
(March 5th). Contrary to your
assertion that the economy is
in trouble, growth last year
beat expectations at a very
healthy 5%, which the OECD
predicts we will be able to
maintain over the next ﬁve
years. Since Najib Razak, the
prime minister, launched
Malaysia’s Economic Transfor-
mation Programme in 2010,
1.8m jobs have been created,
and private investment has
more than tripled. The truth is
that our economy “continues
to perform well”, to quote the
IMF’s most recent report on
our country.
In addition, far from re-
gressing, Malaysia has un-
dergone a political-reform
programme unmatched in
recent history. Since assuming
oﬃce, the prime minister has
repealed the Internal Security
Act; eliminated the bans on
opposition party newspapers
and removed the annual
renewal requirement for print-
ing licences; lifted the ban on
student participation in poli-

The Economist March 26th 2016

tics; repealed the Banishment
Act and the Restricted Resi-
dences Act, as well as emergen-
cy proclamations; passed the
Peaceful Assembly Act, en-
shrining the right to protest
into law for the ﬁrst time; and
set up a bipartisan panel on
electoral reform.
Moreover, the prime min-
ister regularly attends the
festivals of non-Muslims,
going to churches and temples
to share the celebrations of
fellow Malaysians, and is
acknowledged as a leader in
the ﬁght against terrorism and
extremism, both nationally
and internationally.
 This is the true picture of
Malaysia today.

DATO’ AHMAD RASIDI HAZIZI

High commissioner of Malaysia
London

The semicolon; and its faults

One bit of punctuation that
should follow the diastole, the
trigon, the interpunct and the
diple onto the scrap heap of
history is the semicolon ( John-
son, March 12th). Very few
people know how to use semi-
colons correctly and The
Economist’s constant overuse
contradicts its advice—con-
tained in its very own style
guide—not to overdo them.
Kurt Vonnegut said it best:
“Do not use semicolons. They
are transvestite hermaphro-
dites representing absolutely
nothing. All they do is show
you’ve been to college.”

JOHN O’CALLAGHAN

Singapore 7

Letters are welcome and should be
addressed to the Editor at
The Economist, 25 St James’s Street,

London sw1A 1hg

E-mail: letters@economist.com
More letters are available at:
Economist.com/letters

Executive Focus

17

The Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC)
has a vacancy based in Vienna, Austria, for 

Senior Research Analyst

In its Energy Studies Department

Main Responsibilities

• Develops methodologies to analyze and assess energy technologies, builds up frameworks and quantitative models for monitoring and assessing recent and future technological 
developments; 
• 
Searches for, identiﬁ es, collects and maintains data and information on energy related technologies and other relevant issues and conducts studies on energy technologies;
• Develops technology-rich scenarios as input to OPEC’s World Oil Outlook and other model-based studies;
• Assists in establishing and maintaining a network of experts from Member Countries related to technological research and identiﬁ es potential areas of co-operation between 
Member Countries on technological issues;
• Contributes to and/or delivers speeches, articles and presentations to both internal meetings and various international forums.

Requirements

• University degree in engineering or sciences; 
• University degree: 10 years of work experience;  

• Advanced degree preferred;
• Advanced degree: 8 years of work experience.

Skills and Knowledge

• Energy technology; 
• Energy economics; 
• Knowledge of related environmental issues an asset; 
• Communication & interpersonal skills; 

• Analytical & presentation skills;
• Customer ser vice orientation;
• 
Initiative & integrity;
• 
Proﬁ ciency in written and spoken English.

Offer: Commensurate remuneration package i.e. monthly basic salar y of (€6,176 x 12 per year) with tax-free beneﬁ ts and six-week annual leave.

Applications: Applicants should please complete the form called “Application Form” which may be downloaded from our homepage (www.opec.org) and send it to:

OPEC
Finance & Human Resources Department
Helferstorferstrasse 17
A-1010 Vienna – AUSTRIA
or
Email: recruitment@opec.org

Online applicants should quote “Job Code 5.2.03” in the “Subject” ﬁ eld. An automatic reply will be sent to conﬁ rm the successful submission of the documents. 

The deadline for receipt of applications is 17 April 2016. Acknowledgements will only be sent to short-listed candidates. 

The Economist March 26th 2016

18

Executive Focus

The Economist March 26th 2016

Executive Focus

19

The Economist March 26th 2016

20

Executive Focus

EXECUTIVE OFFICER (P-5 LEVEL)
OFFICE OF THE RECTOR
(UNU CENTRE)

(DUTY STATION: TOKYO, JAPAN)

UNU is searching for a new Executive Ofﬁ cer in the Ofﬁ ce of the Rector to be 
located at its Headquarters in Tokyo, Japan. The Executive Ofﬁ cer will report to 
and serve as a senior colleague of the UNU Rector and share responsibility for the 
planning, implementation and coordination of the global academic activities of the 
University carried out from the UNU Centre in Tokyo and through UNU institutes and 
programmes located elsewhere.

The Executive Ofﬁ cer will have as the primary focus of his/her responsibilities assisting 
the Rector and other senior staff in the executive management and coordination 
of the UNU network of institutes and programmes. This includes day-to-day 
management of University affairs, development and issuance of policy guidelines 
within UNU system, strategic planning, process monitoring and evaluation and 
compliance of overall UNU regulatory framework by relevant stakeholders.

Qualiﬁ cations: An advanced university degree in Business Administration, Law, 
Economic or a relevant ﬁ eld. 

Experience: Minimum of 10 years of management experience (some at senior 
level) in a research/academic teaching institution or an international organization. 
Demonstrated experience in policy development and programme planning & 
management.

Candidates should possess excellent management and communications skills with 
ﬂ uency in English. Knowledge of Japanese language is desirable.

CLOSING DATE: 30 APRIL 2016

For the complete information about this position, please visit 
http://unu.edu/about/hr

The successful candidate is expected to take up the position by 
September or October 2016.

The European Union Agency for the Cooperation of Energy Regulators (ACER) works 
towards the completion of a fully integrated, competitive, secure and sustainable 
European energy market, in which electricity and gas are traded and supplied according 
to the highest integrity and transparency standards, and EU consumers beneﬁ t from 
wider choice, better prices and greater protection.

ACER is looking to recruit the

Head of the Market Surveillance and Conduct Department 
(AD11)

ACER plays a central role in promoting the integration of EU energy markets and their 
integrity and transparency. Regulation (EU) No 1227/2011 on wholesale energy market 
integrity and transparency (REMIT) mandated ACER to monitor trading in wholesale 
energy products across the EU to detect and deter market abuse. ACER is completing 
the implementation of REMIT and intends to create a new department responsible for 
market surveillance and conduct analysis. 

The Head of the new Market Surveillance and Conduct Department, reporting to the 
Director, will be responsible, inter alia, for: 
- 
leading and managing the department and its activities related to the analysis 
and assessment of trading and fundamental data reported to ACER and the 
handling of potential market abuse cases;
- ensuring the proper implementation of EU policies and the application of EU 
legislation and/or monitoring such implementation in the areas of activity of the 
department, where this falls within ACER’s responsibility; and 
- as part of the senior management team, contributing more widely to the 
fulﬁ lment of ACER’s mission.

ACER is looking for candidates who are proactive, with a team spirit and very good 
management skills, who are able to prioritise and deliver quality results, with attention 
to detail and commitment to excellence.

The successful candidate will be recruited as an EU Temporary Agent at AD11 
level for a period of 5 years, which can be renewed. The place of employment 
will be Ljubljana (Slovenia), where ACER is based.

The full description of the position, of the eligibility and selection criteria, 
and of the application process can be found in the Vacancy Notice (ref: 
ACER/2016/07) published on ACER’s website: www.acer.europa.eu.

The lead ing magaz ine of ideas

Editor

Competitive six ﬁgure package – Westminster, London

Prospect is looking to recruit an outstanding Editor. Over the last two
decades the magazine has become Britain’s home of intelligent debate
priding itself on its in-depth coverage, original thinking and the vitality
of its writing.

It is a must-read title that illuminates the ideas and events that shape our
times and pioneers new arguments on the issues that matter. Its coverage
spans the worlds of politics, business, culture, arts, technology and science.

The successful candidate will have the leadership qualities, experience
and journalistic lair to build on this success and increase the title’s impact
across its print, digital, event and mobile platforms.
He or she will set an exciting and consistent editorial direction, manage
a talented team, cultivate the relationship with a growing readership and
represent Prospect at the highest level across the political, business and
cultural communities.

The post arises at an exciting moment of opportunity as Prospect has
recently been acquired within the not-for-proit side of the Resolution
Group and will beneit from secure inancial backing enabling the new
Editor to invest in future growth.

The Editor will share Prospect’s and Resolution Group’s commitment to
addressing the long-term issues facing the country, authoritative analysis
that shapes public debate and the non-partisan search for solutions.

For more information about the post and application process visit:
http://www.prospectmagazine.co.uk/other/editor-prospect-magazine

Prospect welcomes applications from under-represented communities and
groups.

Closing date for applications: 30 April 2016.

Closing date: midnight on Sunday 3 April 2016.

The Economist March 26th 2016

Br ieﬁng Business in Amer ica

The Economist March 26th 2016 21

Too much of a good thing

research outﬁt. It means that when Hillary
Clinton and Bernie Sanders, the Democrat-
ic contenders for president, say that the
economy is “rigged”, they have a point. 
The last year has seen a slight dip in ag-
gregate proﬁts because of the high dollar
and the eﬀect of the oil price on energy
ﬁrms. But proﬁts are at near-record highs
relative to GDP (see chart 1 on next page)
and free cash ﬂow—the money ﬁrms gener-
ate after capital investment has been sub-
tracted—has grown yet more strikingly. Re-
turn on capital is at near-record levels, too
(adjusted for goodwill). The past two de-
cades have seen most ﬁrms make more
money than they used to. And more ﬁrms
have become very proﬁtable.

Proﬁts are too high. America needs a giant dose of competition
AMERICA’S airlines used to be famous
for two things: terrible service and
worse ﬁnances. Today ﬂyers still endure
hidden fees, late ﬂights, bruised knees,
clapped-out ﬁttings and sub-par food. The
proﬁt bit of the picture, though, has
changed a lot. Last year America’s airlines
made $24 billion—more than Alphabet, the
parent company of Google. Even as the
price of fuel, one of airlines’ main ex-
penses, collapsed alongside the oil price,
little of that beneﬁt was passed on to con-
sumers through lower prices, with rev-
enues remaining fairly ﬂat. After a bout of
consolidation in the past decade the indus-
try is dominated by four ﬁrms with tight ﬁ-
nancial discipline and many shareholders
in common. And the return on capital is
similar to that seen in Silicon Valley.
What is true of the airline industry is in-
creasingly true of America’s economy as a
whole. Proﬁts have risen in most rich coun-
tries over the past ten years but the in-
crease has been biggest for American
ﬁrms. Coupled with an increasing concen-
tration of ownership, this means the fruits
of economic growth are being hoarded.
This is probably part of the reason that
two-thirds of Americans, including a ma-
jority of Republicans, have come to believe
that the economy “unfairly favours power-
ful interests”, according to polling by Pew, a

Opportunities
An intense burst of consolidation will
boost their proﬁts more. Since 2008 Ameri-
can ﬁrms have engaged in one of the larg-
est rounds of mergers in their country’s his-
tory, worth $10 trillion. Unlike earlier
acquisitions aimed at building global em-
pires, these mergers were largely aimed at
consolidating in America, allowing the
merged companies to increase their mar-
ket shares and cut their costs. The compa-
nies in question usually make no pretence
of planning to pass the savings they make
this way on to their customers; take their

estimates of the synergies involved at face
value and proﬁts in America will rise by a
further 10% or so.
Proﬁts are an essential part of capital-
ism. They give investors a return, encour-
age innovation and signal where resources
should be invested. Their accumulation al-
lows investment in bold new ventures.
Countries where proﬁts are too low—Ja-
pan, for instance—can slip into morbid tor-
por. Firms that ignore proﬁts, such as Chi-
na’s state-run enterprises, lurch around
like aimless zombies, as likely to destroy
value as to create it. 
But high proﬁts across a whole econ-
omy can be a sign of sickness. They can sig-
nal the existence of ﬁrms more adept at si-
phoning wealth oﬀ than creating it afresh,
such as those that exploit monopolies. If
companies capture more proﬁts than they
can spend, it can lead to a shortfall of de-
mand. This has been a pressing problem in
America. It is not that ﬁrms are underin-
vesting by historical standards. Relative to
assets, sales and GDP, the level of invest-
ment is pretty normal. But domestic cash
ﬂows are so high that they still have pots of
cash left over after investment: about $800
billion a year. 
High proﬁts can deepen inequality in
various ways. The pool of income to be
split among employees could be squeezed.
Consumers might pay too much for goods.
In a market the size of America’s prices
should be lower than in other industrial-
ised economies. By and large, they are not.
Though American companies now make a
ﬁfth of their proﬁts abroad, their naughty
secret is that their return-on-equity is 40%
higher at home. 
Most explanations of America’s high 

1

22 Br ieﬁng Business in Amer ica

The Economist March 26th 2016

2 proﬁts draw on national-accounts data
which show that the fall in the share of out-
put going to workers over the past decade
is equivalent to about 60% of the rise in do-
mestic pre-tax proﬁts. Scholars typically
have three explanations for this: technol-
ogy, which has allowed ﬁrms to replace
workers with machines and software; glo-
balisation, which has made it easier to shift
production to lower cost countries; and a
decline in trade-union membership.
None of these accounts, though, ex-
plain the most troubling aspect of Ameri-
ca’s proﬁt problem: its persistence. Busi-
ness theory holds that ﬁrms can at best
enjoy only temporary periods of “compet-
itive advantage” during which they can
rake in cash. After that new companies, in-
spired by these rich pickings, will pile in to
compete away those fat margins, bringing
prices down and increasing both employ-
ment and investment. It’s the mechanism
behind Adam Smith’s invisible hand.
In America that hand seems oddly idle.
An American ﬁrm that was very proﬁtable
in 2003 (one with post-tax returns on capi-
tal of 15-25%, excluding goodwill) had an
83% chance of still being very proﬁtable in
2013; the same was true for ﬁrms with re-
turns of over 25%, according to McKinsey, a
consulting ﬁrm. In the previous decade the
odds were about 50%. The obvious conclu-
sion is that the American economy is too
cosy for incumbents. 
In 1998, Joel Klein, who ran the antitrust
operation at the Department of Justice
(DoJ), declared that “our economy is more
competitive today than it has been in a
long, long time.” He may well have been
right. In the post-war boom American
ﬁrms grew into mighty conglomerates; in
the 1960s J.K. Galbraith, a left-leaning econ-
omist, predicted the rise of a symbiotic “in-
dustrial state” in which large companies
worked closely with the government. But
in the 1980s deregulation opened some in-
dustries, such as telecoms and railways, to
competition. And a new doctrine of share-
holder value led big ﬁrms, such as RJR Na-
bisco, to be broken-up and sprawling con-
glomerates to become focused. In the 1990s
American ﬁrms faced a wave of competi-
tion from low-cost competitors abroad
(and, reciprocally, focused their energy on
expanding overseas). 
Since then the pendulum seems to have
swung back. Huge companies, long the fo-
cus of American worries about competi-
tion, have not actually got any bigger. In
2014 the top 500 listed ﬁrms made about
45% of the global proﬁts of all American
ﬁrms, as they did in the late 1990s. Instead
they, and other companies, have become
more focused. The strategy can be seen as
an amalgam of the philosophies of two
deeply inﬂuential business ﬁgures. Jack
Welch, the boss of General Electric for two
decades at the end of the 20th century, ad-
vised companies to get out of markets

which they did not dominate. Warren Buf-
fett, the 21st century’s best-known investor,
extols ﬁrms that have a “moat” around
them—a barrier that oﬀers stability and
pricing power.
One way American ﬁrms have im-
proved their moats in recent
times is
through creeping consolidation. The Econ-
omist has divided the economy into 900-
odd sectors covered by America’s ﬁve-
yearly economic census. Two-thirds of
them became more concentrated between
1997 and 2012 (see charts 2 and 3 on next
page). The weighted average share of the
top four ﬁrms in each sector has risen from
26% to 32%.

Miracles

These data make it possible to distinguish
between sectors of the economy that are
fragmented, concentrated or oligopolistic,
and to look at how revenues have fared in
each case. Revenues in fragmented indus-
tries—those in which the biggest four ﬁrms
together control less than a third of the
market—dropped from 72% of the total in
1997 to 58% in 2012. Concentrated indus-
tries, in which the top four ﬁrms control be-
tween a third and two-thirds of the market,
have seen their share of revenues rise from
24% to 33%. And just under a tenth of the ac-
tivity takes place in industries in which the
top four ﬁrms control two-thirds or more
of sales. This oligopolistic corner of the
economy includes niche concerns—dog
food, batteries and coﬃns—but also tele-
coms, pharmacies and credit cards.
Concentration does not of itself indi-
cate collusion. Other factors at play might
include regulations that keep competitors
out. Business spending on lobbying dou-

bled over the period as incumbents sought
to shape regulations in ways that suited
them. The rising importance of intangible
assets, particularly patents, has meant that
an ability to manage industry regulators
and the challenges of litigation is more
valuable than ever.
The ability of big ﬁrms to inﬂuence and
navigate an ever-expanding rule book may
explain why the rate of small-company
creation in America is close to its lowest
mark since the 1970s (although an index of
startups run by the Kauﬀman Foundation
has shown ﬂickers of life recently). Small
ﬁrms normally lack both the working capi-
tal needed to deal with red tape and long
court cases, and the lobbying power that
would bend rules to their purposes. A lack
of lobbying clout and legal savvy may also
help explain foreign ﬁrms’ loss of momen-
tum. In the 1990s adventurers from abroad
piled into America, with the share of out-
put from foreign-owned subsidiaries rising
steadily. But foreign ﬁrms seem to have lost
their mojo. Since 2003 their contribution
has been ﬂat at about 6% of private busi-
ness output.
Another factor that may have made
proﬁts stickier is the growing clout of giant
institutional shareholders such as Black-
Rock, State Street and Capital Group. To-
gether they own 10-20% of most American
companies, including ones that compete
with each other. Claims that they rig things
seem far-fetched, particularly since many
of these funds are index trackers; their deci-
sions as to what to buy and sell are made
for them. But they may well set the tone, for
example by demanding that chief execu-
tives remain disciplined about pricing and
restraining investment in new capacity. 

1

Ever better at making money 

US domestic corporate prof its

As % of GDP

Post-tax prof its

Post-tax
free-cash-f low

10

8

6

4

2

+

0

–

2

US companies’ global return on capital*

%

1

20

16

12

8

4

0

1929

40

50

60

70

80

90

2000

10

14

1963

70

80

90

2000

13

Distr ibution of prof its among US companies

1965-67

1995-97

2011-13

% of total companies:

<0

0-5

5-10

10-15

15-20

20-25
25-30
30-35
Return on capital*, %

35-40

40-45

45-50

>50

50

40

30

20

10

0

Sources: Bureau of Economic Analysis; Federal Reser ve; “Measur ing and Managing the
Value of Companies”, 6th ed., McKinsey Corporate Per formance Analytics, August 2015

*Excluding goodwill

The Economist March 26th 2016

2 The overall eﬀect could mute competition.
Quantifying the eﬀect of the corporate
America’s defences is tricky. Proﬁts are not
the whole picture. In some industries—
banking is a case in point—rent-seeking
will result in high pay to an employee elite
instead. But one can get a crude sense of
what is going on by dividing the proﬁts all
ﬁrms generate into the “bog-standard” and
the “exceptional”. Over the past 50 years
return on capital has averaged about 10%
(excluding goodwill) and that is what in-
vestors tend to demand, so let that repre-
sent bog-standard proﬁts. The excess on
top of that—which may reﬂect brilliant in-
novations, wise historic investments in in-
tangible assets such as brands, or, perhaps,
a lack of competition—is the exceptional
bit. For S&P 500 ﬁrms these exceptional
proﬁts are currently running at about $300
billion a year, equivalent to a third of taxed
operating proﬁts, or 1.7% of GDP.

I love you, you pay my rent
About a quarter of America’s abnormal
proﬁts are spread across a wide range of
sectors. Returns on capital, concentration
and prices have risen in many pockets of
the economy. The cable television industry
has become more tightly controlled, and
many Americans rely on a monopoly pro-
vider; prices have risen at twice the rate of
inﬂation over the past ﬁve years. Consoli-
dation in one of Mr Buﬀett’s favourite in-
dustries, railroads, has seen freight prices
rise by 40% in real terms and returns on
capital almost double since 2004. The pro-
posed merger of Dow Chemical and Du-
Pont, announced last December, illustrates
the trend to concentration. After combin-
ing, the companies plan to split into three
specialist companies each of which will
have a higher share of its market than ei-
ther original company had before the deal.
They say the plan will yield $3 billion in
cost savings. Since 2008 American mergers
have sought to remove recurring annual
costs of about $150 billion from industrial
ledgers. Few ﬁrms that are not regulated
utilities have public plans to pass these
gains on to consumers. 
Concentration is contagious. As ﬁrms
become more powerful those elsewhere
on associated chains of customers and
suppliers bulk up in response. Google now
dominates internet searches for ﬂights and
hotels. This has led Expedia, the leading in-
ternet travel-agent, to beef up by buying
two of its main rivals over the past two
years. The spectre of very big online travel
sites dominating the purchase of hotel
rooms has led the hotel ﬁrms to consoli-
date, too, with Marriott agreeing to buy
Starwood this month. (A Chinese ﬁrm, An-
bang, may make a counter-bid).
Roughly another quarter of abnormal
proﬁts comes from the health-care indus-
try, where a cohort of pharmaceutical and
medical-equipment ﬁrms make aggregate

More to fewer

Top four f irms’ average share of total revenue, %

United States, across 893 industr ies, grouped by sector*

1997

2012
10

0

20

30

40

50

2

IT, telecoms and 
media
Manufactur ing†‡
Transpor t and 
logistics
Retail trade

Finance and 
insurance
All sectors

Wholesale trade

Administrative

Utilities

Proper ty

Ar ts and 
recreation†
Education†
Professional 
ser vices
Accommodation 
and cater ing
Health care

Other ser vices

Sources: US Census Bureau;
The Economist

*Weighted-average
†2007    ‡By valued-added

returns on capital of 20-50%. The industry
is riddled with special interests and is gov-
erned by patent rules that allow ﬁrms tem-
porary monopolies on innovative new
drugs and inventions. Much of health-care
purchasing in America is ultimately con-
trolled by insurance ﬁrms. Four of the larg-
est, Anthem, Cigna, Aetna and Humana,
are planning to merge into two larger ﬁrms.
The rest of the abnormal proﬁts are to
be found in the technology sector, where
ﬁrms such as Google and Facebook enjoy
market shares of 40% or more. By Silicon
Valley’s account such penetration reﬂects

A widespread effect

Top four f irms’ share of total industr y revenue, %

United States, 893 industr ies, grouped by sector

BECOMING MORE
CONCENTRATED

100

%

,

*

t
s
e

t

a

l

,

e
u
n
e
v
e

r

y

r
t
s

u
d
n

i

l

a

t

o

t

f

o
e

r

a
h

s

’
s

m

r
i
f

r

u
o

f

p
o

T

80

60

40

20

0

Br ieﬁng Business in Amer ica 23

the popularity and inventiveness of the
products on oﬀer, some of which are free to
consumers. Today’s dominant ﬁrms could
be tomorrow’s Nokia or Blackberry: Apple
now trades on just 11 times earnings, sug-
gesting investors expect it to decline. Firms
such as Uber and Airbnb are a rare source
of disruption in the economy, competing
ﬁercely with incumbents.
But many of these arguments can be
spun the other way. Alphabet, Facebook
and Amazon are not being valued by in-
vestors as if they are high risk, but as if their
market shares are sustainable and their
network eﬀects and accumulation of data
will eventually allow them to reap mo-
nopoly-style proﬁts. (Alphabet
is now
among the biggest lobbyists of any ﬁrm,
spending $17m last year.) A fall from grace
in the tech world is not as bad as you might
imagine. Microsoft’s operating proﬁts to-
day are twice what they were in 2000,
when Mr Klein was prosecuting it in an
antitrust trial. And the “sharing economy”
startups that are being so highly rated by
some investors mostly seek to dominate
their markets. The large mountains of cash
they are burning today can only be justi-
ﬁed if they eventually mature to enjoy
very high market shares and margins.
In the past, periods of high and stable
proﬁts have ended. Just three years after Mr
Galbraith made his 1967 prediction of a
cosy, collaborative business world, it was
already toast: proﬁts had collapsed by a
third relative to GDP as recession struck.
Today’s proﬁts, too, may be more vulner-
able than they look. If wages ﬁnally pick up
it could crimp margins. The earnings-per-
share of listed ﬁrms have fallen slightly in
the past few quarters, though a strong dol-
lar and declining oil revenues explain
much of that. Some observers of the stock-
market argue that it is already signalling
more decline. The gap between the real 

1

3

800

200
10

Total industr y
revenue*, $bn

Sectors

Wholesale
Retail
Finance
Manufactur ing†
Health care
IT
Other

BECOMING LESS
CONCENTRATED

0

10

30
40
50
60
70
Top four f irms’ share of total industr y revenue, 1997, %
*Latest available, 2007 or 2012 †By valued-added
Sources: US Census Bureau; The Economist

100

20

80

90

Interactive: Explore the data by sector and individual industr y at Economist.com/corprev16

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
upon whether outlandishly large institu-
tional shareholders with positions in al-
most all ﬁrms can implicitly guide them
not to compete head on; or on why small
ﬁrms seem to be struggling. Their purpose
is to police illegal conduct, not reimagine
the world. They lack scope.
The second limitation is intellectual.
America’s antitrust apparatus has gone
through periods of leniency (1915-35) and
stridency (1936-72). By the 1980s the Chica-
go school of free-market thought was as-
cendant. Its insistence that the eﬃciency
beneﬁts of big mergers should not be dis-
missed had a big inﬂuence on the courts.
Antitrust guidelines which held that any
deal involving a ﬁrm with a market share
of 35% or more should be considered sus-
pect on principle have been set aside in fa-
vour of a more granular approach, with
regulators looking ever more closely at the
speciﬁc eﬀects of a deal. To work out if a
deal lowers consumers’ level of choice or
lets ﬁrms hike prices they will study micro-
markets in speciﬁc regions.
Who does not prefer the riﬂe to the
blunderbuss, the scalpel to the axe? Such
sophistication allows regulators to de-
mand clever remedies, such as the disposal
of subsidiaries. But with their heads deep
in data and court rulings that set ﬁne prece-
dents, the scientists of antitrust are able to
sidestep some troubling questions. If mar-
kets are truly competitive, why do so many
companies now claim they can retain the
cost synergies that big deals create, not pass
them on to consumers? Why do investors
believe them? Why have returns on capital
risen almost everywhere?
These legal and intellectual limitations
of the antitrust apparatus raise the ques-
tion of competition to the political sphere—
currently, alas, a realm well supplied with
blunderbusses and axes wielded haphaz-
ardly and at the wrong targets. Americans’
mistrust of their economic system and the
companies that make so much money in it
has so far been channelled into calls for

The Economist March 26th 2016

protectionism and government interven-
tion. Free trade should be limited. Health-
care ﬁrms should be more regulated. For-
eign ﬁrms—particularly Chinese ones—
should be discriminated against. Wages
should be forced up. Taxes on companies
should be raised. 

Memories of the future
Nowhere has the alternative approach
been articulated. It would aim to unleash a
burst of competition to shake up the com-
fortable incumbents of America Inc. It
would involve a serious eﬀort to remove
the red tape and occupational-licensing
schemes that strangle small businesses
and deter new entrants. It would examine
a loosening of the rules that give too much
protection to some intellectual-property
rights. It would involve more active, albeit
cruder, antitrust actions. It would start a
more serious conversation about whether
it makes sense to have most of the coun-
try’s data in the hands of a few very large
ﬁrms. It would revisit the entire issue of
corporate lobbying, which has become a
key mechanism by which incumbent ﬁrms
protect themselves.
Large ﬁrms no longer employ all that
many people in America: the domestic
employee base of the S&P 500 is only
around a tenth of total American employ-
ment. New ﬁrms would invest more, em-
ploy more staﬀ, and force incumbents to
invest more in order to compete. If this
sounds pie in the sky, consider the shale
revolution over the past decade. Although
the industry is now suﬀering from low oil
prices, it is a rare example of entrepreneur-
ial spirit taking on a stodgy industry to the
beneﬁt of all. A new commitment to com-
petition could be the source of optimism
that America is desperately searching for.
After all, it is only a healthy dollop of greed
and a belief in a better future that prompts
people to start from scratch and try to cross
the moat that has been dug around cor-
porate America. 7

24 Br ieﬁng Business in Amer ica

2 yield on equities and that on government
bonds suggests that either ﬁrms are riskier
than ever, bond yields are freakishly low,
or that proﬁts face a cyclical downturn.
Even so, it is hard to identify a mecha-
nism by which proﬁts might fall to more
normal levels. Investors and managers
continue to place extraordinarily high pro-
ﬁt multiples on businesses with “moats”.
The cable television industry is supposed-
ly under pressure from the likes of Netﬂix
and Amazon Prime. Yet in 2015 Charter
Communications, a cable company,
bought Time Warner Cable for $79 billion,
or 26 times its free cash ﬂow, which implies
that it believes it will be in a position to
raise prices. When Heinz (part-controlled
by Mr Buﬀett) bought Kraft Foods in 2015, it
paid 31 times the free cash ﬂow and
promptly slashed spending to boost mar-
gins, suggesting it felt the threat from rival
makers of cheese slices was rather small. 

Antitrust, but verify
Perhaps antitrust regulators will act, forc-
ing proﬁts down. The relevant responsibil-
ities are mostly divided between the DoJ
and the Federal Trade Commission (FTC),
although some industries, such as railways
and telecoms, also have their own regula-
tors. The DOJ and FTC are busy trying to
police the mergers-and-acquisition boom.
Rather than contest every deal they select
cases that set new precedents and argue
them in court: of the 15,000 deals between
2005-14, about 3% have been subject to
close scrutiny. 
Together the two bodies have roamed
far and wide. The DoJ has blocked domes-
tic deals, such as the takeover of AT&T by T-
Mobile USA in 2011, and cross-border com-
binations that would have caused concen-
tration in global industries, such as the
merger of two chipmakers, Applied Mate-
rials and Tokyo Electron, in 2015. The FTC
spends a big chunk of its time looking at
health care. It has blocked hospital mergers
and fought “pay-for-delay” deals in which
pharmaceutical ﬁrms try to stop generic
competitors from launching rival products
when patents expire. The DoJ is casting a
beady eye over the airlines.
Yet the system suﬀers two limitations.
One is constitutional. The two bodies’ job
is to police infringements of a well-estab-
lished and mature body of law through the
courts. This leaves them admirably free of
overt political interference and lobbying
but it also limits their scope. Lots of impor-
tant subjects are beyond their purview.
They cannot consider whether the length
and security of patents is excessive in an
age when intellectual property is so impor-
tant. They may not dwell deeply on wheth-
er the business model of large technology
platforms such as Google has a long-term
dependence on the monopoly rents that
could come from its vast and irreproduci-
ble stash of data. They can only touch

Europe

Brussels bombings

Not again

B R U S S E L S A N D P A R I S

Attack location

Zaventem
Airport

B R U S S E L S

Place
de la
Bourse

Maalbeek
metro
station

European
Commission
European
Council

3 km

Molenbeek

After a top fugitive is arrested, jihadists strike once more
WHEN the leaders of Belgium and
France announced the arrest of Sa-
lah Abdeslam on March 18th, they made
sure not to sound too triumphant. Mr Ab-
deslam was Europe’s most-wanted terror
suspect; he is believed to have been the Is-
lamic State (IS) logistics chief behind the at-
tacks that killed 130 people in Paris in No-
vember. But he had evaded a police
dragnet in Brussels’ Molenbeek district for
four months. That suggested shoddy Bel-
gian police work and a deep and danger-
ous IS network. On March 21st Jan Jambon,
Belgium’s interior minister, warned that
terrorists might strike in response. The next
day they did, carrying out suicide attacks at
Brussels’ Zaventem airport and in a down-
town metro station.
The strikes showed the same worrying
sophistication as those in Paris. At the air-
port two jihadists, later identiﬁed as broth-
ers, set oﬀ bombs in the departure lounge,
killing at least 11 people. (Police found and
neutralised another bomb; as The Econo-
mist went to press, they were searching for
a third attacker identiﬁed as Najim Laa-
chroui, also linked to the Paris attacks.) The
bomb an hour later in Maalbeek metro sta-
tion killed at least 20 people, forcing the
evacuation of nearby EU headquarters
buildings.
The timing of the attacks is unlikely to
have been coincidental. Mr Abdeslam’s ar-
rest may have triggered another cell to act
on an existing plan. Or perhaps he planned

to take part himself, and his capture forced
co-conspirators to bring the attack forward.
Either way, the sophistication of the at-
tacks suggests that Europe must prepare for
a “new normal” of periodic terrorism. On
Brussels’ Place de la Bourse, where locals
gathered after the attacks to light candles
and lay ﬂowers, the mood was sombre.
“We thought it was over because they
caught the terrorist,” said one mourner.
“Now we know it is not.”
Authorities remain optimistic over Mr
Abdeslam’s arrest because it provides a
rare chance to interrogate a prominent liv-
ing jihadist. France has asked for his extra-
dition, hoping he will ﬁll gaps in what is
known about the Paris and Brussels at-
tacks. But what French investigators have
learned so far is disturbing. For at least the
past three years, IS appears to have been

The Economist March 26th 2016 25

Also in this section

26 France’s long emergency

27 An EU-Turkey migrant deal

28 Spain without government

28 What Europeans think of each other

29 Charlemagne: Ireland and Brexit

For daily analysis and debate on Europe, visit

Economist.com/europe

building a network across Europe to carry
out terrorist outrages in diﬀerent cities.
Currently 18 people detained in six coun-
tries are suspected of helping the Paris at-
tackers. That may be the tip of the iceberg.
This week Belgian police identiﬁed yet an-
other suspect whom they believe was in
telephone contact with the Paris attackers.
French investigators have been taken
aback by the sophistication of IS opera-
tives. The group’s bomb-makers in Europe
are apparently able to make explosives us-
ing triacetone triperoxide, or TATP, whose
precursors can be found in common pro-
ducts such as nail polish remover. Another
sign of competent tradecraft is the disci-
pline of their communications. The French
authorities had no clue of what was to un-
fold on November 13th, and there seems to
have been no actionable intelligence be-
fore the attacks in Brussels. The terrorists
apparently use encryption for all their
electronic communication. And IS increas-
ingly carries out multiple, sequenced at-
tacks against soft targets to spread confu-
sion and stretch emergency services thin.
The most critical problem European se-
curity agencies face in responding to this
threat is failure to pool information. In lin-
guistically divided Belgium, inter-agency
co-operation is known to be dire. At the
European level, Europol, the law enforce-
ment agency of the EU, does a useful job in
facilitating information exchange, but it
has no executive powers to carry out inves-
tigations. And intelligence co-operation
had been slowed by the legacy of totalitar-
ianism, which has left many Europeans,
the Germans in particular, with a deep
aversion to the surveillance state. France
has been pushing hard for a common Euro-
pean registry of passenger names to help
track terror suspects’ movements ever
since the Charlie Hebdo attacks in early
2015; the European Council agreed to the 

1

26 Europe

The Economist March 26th 2016

2 measure in December. Yet the European
Parliament, concerned over data privacy,
has failed to ratify it.
A terrorist strike just metres from their
own oﬃces may help EU legislators see the
urgency. Yet better security will not heal
the social and ethnic divisions that have
made Europe fertile ground for Islamic ex-
tremism. In the hours after the attacks, the
capital transformed into a diorama of
these tensions. In the city centre EU bu-
reaucrats in suits and ties were trapped in

their gleaming steel-and-glass oﬃces as po-
lice cleared the streets.
Among the run-down brick apartments
of the Vierwindenstraat in Molenbeek,
meanwhile, where Mr Abdeslam was ar-
rested last week, no one would talk about
the bombings. A middle-aged resident
named Mehmet said he understood why
local youth turn to extremism: “It’s a pou-
belle (dustbin) here.” On a nearby garage
door, someone had scrawled the words
mort aux keuf (death to the police). 7

France is realising that its state of emergency may last a long time
FRESHLY painted in pale turquoise, “La
Belle Equipe”, a bistro in eastern Paris,
reopened this week after months of an-
guish. During last November’s terrorist at-
tacks, 20 people were shot dead there. Four
months on, the French are trying to turn
the page after the worst-ever terrorist at-
tack on their soil. But the latest carnage in
Brussels is a bloody reminder that France,
and all of Europe, will have to learn to live
with terrorism.
After two deadly terrorist attacks in
2015, France, home to Europe’s biggest
Muslim minority, has been more alert to
the threat than any other European coun-
try. Manuel Valls, the prime minister, fre-
quently takes to the airwaves to remind the
French of their vulnerability. In Munich
last month he warned fellow Europeans:
“We have entered a new era, marked by the
long-term presence of hyper-terrorism.” It
was the end, he said, of “insouciance”. 
As in America after the September 11th
attacks, the French response has been to
shift the balance between civil liberties
and security ﬁrmly towards security. In
November France became the only Euro-
pean country to declare a state of emergen-
cy over terrorism; it remains in place until
May 26th. This grants the police sweeping
powers to put suspects under house arrest
and search premises without judicial war-
rants. The Socialist president, François Hol-
lande, says the country is “at war”. Under
“operation Sentinelle” 10,000 soldiers
have been deployed on French streets. This
week Bernard Cazeneuve, the interior min-
ister, added another 1,600.
The French seem to have accepted
without much complaint the disruption to
daily life that this has imposed. Bags are
routinely checked at the entrances to shops
on the Champs-Elysées or other busy
streets. Queues for concerts can snake
down the pavements due to security con-

trols. Passengers for high-speed trains from
Paris to Brussels and Amsterdam must
now pass through scanners, as those be-
tween Paris and London have for years.
With border checks reinstated, car jour-
neys in and out of France can be delayed,
too. Such nuisances are tolerated: a poll
earlier this year showed 79% approved of
extending the state of emergency. 
Yet settling into a long-term alert raises
two diﬃculties. The ﬁrst is getting the man-
agement of public anxiety right. After the
November attacks, a spirit of solidarity pre-
vailed in Paris, with photos deﬁantly
shared on social media under the hashtag
“#Jesuisenterrasse” (I’m at a pavement
café). Nonetheless, over a third of Parisians
told a recent poll that they have changed
their behaviour, going less often to theatres
or football matches. 
Visitors are also nervous. Last month
Anne Hidalgo, the Socialist mayor of Paris,
and Valérie Pécresse, the centre-right presi-

dent of the Paris region, took an unusual
joint trip to Tokyo to reassure Japanese
tourists, whose number plunged 66% in
December from the previous year’s level. 
Yet it is awkward for the government to
reassure visitors while telling its own citi-
zens to prepare for another attack. Public
buildings are festooned with public-infor-
mation posters entitled “How to react after
a terrorist attack”, instructing people to
turn oﬀ their mobile phones, keep away
from windows and lie ﬂat on the ground.
Schools must carry out compulsory “con-
ﬁnement” exercises, in which pupils are
quarantined in a classroom while win-
dows and doors are sealed with wet
towels or tape. “It’s terrifying for the chil-
dren,” says one primary-school teacher.
Equally diﬃcult is meaningfully im-
proving the security of soft targets, such as
the public areas of airports, train stations
and busy streets. Now that security around
boarding areas is tight, the focus has shifted
to the outer zones, where friends and fam-
ily linger with passengers. Mr Cazeneuve
this week announced that access to the en-
trance halls of French airports and main
transport hubs will be allowed only for
those with tickets—a ﬁrst for Europe. Yet
even this policy is unlikely to be applied
consistently. Passengers taking trains to
Brussels and Amsterdam are scanned be-
fore boarding in Paris; but not those leaving
for Lyon or Marseilles. Access to the Paris
Metro and buses will continue to be open.
Perhaps the trickiest thing about a state
of emergency is judging when to exit. Al-
ready, there is talk of another extension in
June to cover France’s hosting of the Euro-
pean Championship football tournament.
Yet prolongation has its own problems.
One Paris oﬃcial confesses that Japanese
tourists seem more worried than reas-
sured by France’s state of emergency. The
extraordinary measures it allows were in-
tended as just that, not a permanent re-
sponse to a persistent threat. 7

Terror ism and France

The end of insouciance

P A R I S

Fifteen years of terror ism

Main attacks in western Europe, September 11th 2001 - March 22nd 2016
jihadists
=1 killed

Attacks causing two or more deaths

Sources: Global Terror ism Database, University of Mar yland; press repor ts; The Economist

*Latest repor ts

a
P

i
r

s

B

r

u

e
s
s

l

s

a

r
i

o
p

t
r

/

m

e

r
t

o

By:

other

unknown af f iliation

2015

2016

S

w

e
z
t
i

l
r

d
n
a

B

t
i
r

a

i

n

a
p
S

i

n

B

t
i
r

a

i

n

a
p
S

i

n

a
p
S

i

n

a
p
S

i

n

F

r

n
a

e
c

B

e

l

g

i

u

m

*

N

o

r

w

y
a

F
F

r
r

n
n
a
a

e
e
c
c

B

t
i
r

a

i

n

N

e

t

n
d
a
n
p
a
S
e
h

l
r

s

i

a
p
S

i

n

a
p
S

i

n

B

t
i
r

a

i

n

F

r

n
a

e
c

e
G

r

m

n
a

y

B

t
i
r

a

i

n

B

e

l

g

i

u

m

F
F

r
r

n
n
a
a

e
e
c
c

D

n
e

m

a

r

k

G

r

e
c
e
e

n
o
d
n
o
L

T

u
b
/
e
b
u

s

O

s

l

/
o

U

t

a
y
o

s
I

l

d
n
a

M

d
a

i
r

d

r
t

a

i

n

s

2002 2003

2001

2004

2005

2009

2011

2012

2006 2007

2013 2014

Attacks causing one death
Cumulative total: Austr ia 1; Belgium 1; Br itain 14; France 6; Greece 5; Ireland 2; Italy 3; Netherlands 3; Spain 9; Sweden 1

a
h
C

i
l
r

e

H

o
d
b
e

o
P

i
l

e
c

w

o

m

s
/
n
a

e
p
u

r

m

a

r

e
k

t

k
5
2
=

l
l
i

d
e

 
 
 
The Economist March 26th 2016

Europe 27

sinking further into a cycle of repression
and violence.
The best (if still fragile) hope of escap-
ing chaos may lie in the new deal with Eu-
rope. In exchange for a commitment to ac-
cept migrants sent back from Greece and
seal oﬀ a smuggling route used by over a
million people since the start of 2015, Tur-
key has wrested a string of concessions
from the EU. One, a promise to inject some
fuel into the country’s stalled membership
talks with the EU, is mere window dress-
ing. The opening of a new chapter in the
negotiations will keep the accession pro-
cess running in low gear, but with little real
hope of reaching its destination. Another, a
pledge of €6 billion ($6.8 billion) in aid for
the refugees Turkey harbours, is more ap-
pealing, especially for a country that ran a
$33 billion current account deﬁcit in 2015.
The most important, at least in political
terms, is an oﬀer of visa-free travel by June.
Even for those Turks not forced to endure
long waits in front of European consulates,
the issue is a matter of national pride. For
their president, Recep Tayyip Erdogan, it is
a vote-winner. Optimists argue that the
strong conditions attached to the promise
of visa liberalisation will bring Turkey
back into the European fold and help stem
its descent into authoritarianism. There is
at least a chance that rebuilding bridges
with Europe may rein in the authoritarian
instincts of Mr Erdogan and embolden the
few reformists left in his government.
Yet the EU’s new openness cannot undo
the damage done by the recent violence,
which may strike a crippling blow to Tur-
key’s tourism industry by scaring Euro-
peans away. The deal itself still faces legal,
political and logistical challenges that
could cause it to unravel. Greece will ﬁnd it
hard to set up the infrastructure needed to
ensure orderly mass returns. Turkey will
struggle mightily to meet the exacting con-
ditions required for visa liberalisation by
the summer. Even if it succeeds, EU govern-
ments, which have a ﬁnal say in the matter,
may bow to domestic pressure and torpe-
do the visa agreement at the last minute.
Pessimists fear that Mr Erdogan, who
once boasted of being able to ﬂood Greece
and Bulgaria with refugees, may use his le-
verage over the EU to press for still more
concessions. The president does not seem
terribly malleable; he will heed the advice
of international bodies only “as long as it is
fair,” he said recently. “If it is not, sorry.”
Rather than change course, he could keep
ratcheting up military action in the south-
east and putting the squeeze on any do-
mestic opponents who get in the way. Nev-
ertheless, the renewal of a European
connection may be the best chance of
keeping the country from going oﬀ the
rails. “Even some limited engagement has
an upside,” says Atilla Yesilada, a political
analyst. “Leaving Turkey out in the cold has
no beneﬁts.” 7

Turkey and the EU

Refugees and terror

I S T A N B U L

Just as the EU declares Turkey safe for refugees, Istanbul is hit by a bomb
ON MARCH 18th the European Union,
seeking to stem the inﬂux of refugees
from the Middle East, struck a deal to re-
turn asylum-seekers who cross the Aegean
illegally to Turkey, in exchange for prom-
ises of aid and other concessions. The fol-
lowing day, a suicide bomber killed at least
ﬁve people, including himself and four for-
eigners, on Istanbul’s most popular pedes-
trian shopping street (pictured). Turkey has
endured ﬁve big terror attacks since Octo-
ber, at a cost of nearly 200 lives; its war
against Kurdish militants has left hundreds
more dead. But after a disastrous year, the
deal with the EU may oﬀer at least a tenta-
tive promise of something better.
No group has stepped forward to claim
responsibility for the latest bombing. The
day after the attack, oﬃcials identiﬁed a
Turkish member of Islamic State (IS) as the
perpetrator. IS has been quick to take credit
for atrocities elsewhere, from Jakarta to
San Bernardino. But it has yet to do so for
any attack by its sympathisers in Turkey, in-
cluding a double bombing that killed 102
people in October.
Distressingly, the list of other possible
suspects has grown longer over the past
year. In neighbouring Syria, Turkish-
backed proxies are ﬁghting the regime of
President Bashar al-Assad, his Russian al-
lies, and the People’s Protection Units
(YPG), Kurdish ﬁghters associated with the

Kurdistan Workers’ Party (PKK) with which
Turkey is once again at war. Turkish forces
have shelled the YPG directly. As the terror
attacks continue, oﬃcials in Ankara, the
Turkish caital, have pointed to all of the
above as possible culprits. A Turkey that
once tried to play ﬁreﬁghter in Syria is
slowly being consumed by its ﬂames.
Yet the biggest threat to Turkey’s securi-
ty is homegrown. An urban insurgency
waged by the PKK across the country’s
southeast, accompanied by a ruthless
crackdown by Turkish security forces, has
left more than a thousand people dead, in-
cluding some 300 civilians. With the army
deploying tanks and artillery against re-
bels armed with rocket-propelled gre-
nades and machine guns, entire neigh-
bourhoods have been blasted apart.
Losing ground in the southeast, the PKK
appears to be turning its ﬁrepower on soft
targets, including civilians, in the country’s
west. In the past two months, terrorist at-
tacks claimed by one of the group’s oﬀ-
shoots have killed 66 people in Ankara. A
senior PKK commander has warned that
“at this point in the struggle” his militants
are poised to ﬁght by any means necessary.
Amid the blowback from Syria, the in-
creasingly radicalised Kurdish insurgency
and a mounting crackdown against aca-
demics, journalists and politicians sus-
pected of PKK sympathies, Turkey risks

28 Europe

The Economist March 26th 2016

Spain without government

Stuck in the centre

What Europeans think of each other

Green-eyed continent

V A L E N C I A

While regional parties collaborate,
national ones remain at odds
ONCE a stronghold of the conservative
Popular Party (PP), led by the prime
minister, Mariano Rajoy, Valencia fell to a
broad coalition of anti-austerity left-wing-
ers in regional elections in May. Some now
see that as a potential model for a national
coalition government—a goal that has
eluded Spain’s politicians since the general
election in December.
Spain’s voters created the three-month
impasse by scattering their votes among
four large parties and a smattering of small
ones. The PP, which struggled with sky-
high unemployment and corruption scan-
dals, lost a third of its support. It can govern
only in unlikely alliance with its arch-rival,
the Socialist party. Likelier would be a
broad left coalition headed by the Socialist
leader, Pedro Sánchez, and backed by
some of the parties—like the left-wing pop-
ulist insurgents, Podemos—who prop up
Valencia’s current government.
In Valencia, that coalition is governing
with a programme in which pragmatism
trumps radicalism. “We run things better,
and don’t steal,” says the region’s deputy
president, Mónica Oltra. She helps lead
Compromís, a local leftist party that allied
with the Socialists and others to form the
government. It also stood jointly with Po-
demos at December’s general election,
claiming second place in the region.
High public debt has prevented Ximo
Puig, the region’s Socialist president, from
pursuing many anti-austerity policies; he
has raised taxes slightly and paid for some
social welfare projects. But for voters tired
of corruption scandals, it is enough for the
government to appear clean and calm. The
ﬁnancial crisis revealed murky links be-
tween politicians, collapsed construction
ﬁrms and failed savings banks; many of
the local PP’s former leaders now face
court cases. Most deny wrongdoing, but
Marcos Benavent, a former oﬃcial known
for his expensive designer jackets, ap-
peared in court last year sporting a bushy
white beard, earrings and hippy bangles,
apologising and vowing to “try to pay back
all I stole.”
Though the Socialists have co-operated
closely with Compromís in Valencia, they
have clashed repeatedly with Podemos in
Madrid. In one of his ﬁrst parliamentary
appearances Podemos’s leader, Pablo Igle-
sias, accused the former socialist prime
minister, Felipe González, of being stained
with quicklime—a reference to the way in
which state-sponsored death-squads dis-

Europeans have warped views of their neighbours—and themselves
“THE grass is always greener on the
other side of the fence” originates
from a Latin phrase, quoted by Ovid, to
do with envying another man’s fruitful
harvest. Fittingly, modern day Italians
also have a chlorophyll-tinted view of
their neighbours. According to new data
from Livewhat, a Geneva-based survey,
Ovid’s successors tend to believe that life
is better in other countries than the locals
do. Over 70% of Italians imagine life to be
good in France, when asked to rate it on a
scale from one to ten, whereas only 43%
of the French have the same opinion.
The Italians are a self-critical bunch,
but romanticised views of other coun-
tries are widely held in Europe. In all of
the countries surveyed, more people
believe that life in France, Germany, Italy,
Sweden and Switzerland is better than
those countries’ own citizens reckon.
This creates odd perceptions, built on
mutual jealousy. The Swiss think that the
Swedes fare best in Europe; Swedes are
quite certain that the Swiss are the truly

enviable ones.
By contrast, Europe’s poorer countries
are cast in a dim light: many think life in
Greece and Poland is unhappier than it is.
Other Europeans view Poland poorly,
while Poles have the most favourable
view of their neighbours. This may ex-
plain why 0.1% of Poland’s population—
among the lowest rates in Europe—is
made up of people from elsewhere in the
EU, and why there are 1.5m Poles living in
Germany and Britain alone.
Alas, some intra-European crushes go
unrequited. According to a survey by
Lord Ashcroft, a British pollster, Scandi-
navian countries tend to be the best-liked
in Europe. Within this select clique, the
Swedes are the most popular of all, with
84% of respondents holding a favourable
view of the country. Poor Romania,
meanwhile, has the fewest fans on the
continent, with less than a third of Euro-
peans rating it positively. And the coun-
tries that like Romania the least? Croa-
tia… and Sweden.

Europeans’ perceptions of life in other countr ies

2015, % of respondents who think living conditions are good

Perception
of themselves

Think conditions are better
than the countr y thinks

Think conditions are worse
than the countr y thinks

% thinking living
conditions are good

75

25
10

Switz.

Sweden

Br itain

L I V I N G C O N D I T I O N S I N :
Germany
France
Spain

Poland

Italy

Greece

:

O

T

G
N

I

D
R
O

C
C

A

Switz.

Sweden

Br itain

Germany

France

Spain

Poland

Italy

Greece

Source: Livewhat

posed of the bodies of Basque separatists
they murdered in the 1980s, when he was
in oﬃce. Many Podemos members would
prefer fresh elections to forming a coalition
with the Socialists. And Mr Iglesias exer-
cises direct control over only two-thirds of
his party’s parliamentary tally; the rest ac-
tually belong to local coalitions led by part-
ners like Compromís.
If the Socialists and Podemos do team
up—indeed, even if they gain the help of

the communist-led United Left—they will
still lack a majority. For that, they would
need the support of a mixed group of Cata-
lan and Basque nationalists, some of them
right-wing. Many politicians, tiring of co-
alition-building eﬀorts, are already prepar-
ing for new elections. Yet that may not
solve the stand-oﬀ; voters look set to elect
another fractured parliament if they are
called back to the polls. Spain may have to
wait till autumn for its next government. 7

The Economist March 26th 2016

Europe 29

Charlemagne

A terrible problem is born

Britain’s membership of the European Union suits Ireland perfectly. Brexit would open old wounds

end British rule in Ulster.
Since the Northern Irish deal of 1998, Sinn Fein has vowed to
pursue a united, socialist Ireland peacefully. But some hardliners
think the 1998 compromise, too, was shabby, and are ﬁghting on.
One such group killed a prison oﬃcer in Belfast this month.
Thus Ireland’s prime minister, Enda Kenny, may feel uncom-
fortable as he watches this weekend’s parades. His Fine Gael
party represents the country’s most anglophile camp, and it ab-
hors irredentists who call the rising unﬁnished business. Some in
Fine Gael believe the rising was unnecessary; they think inde-
pendence was won not by force but by Irish parliamentarians in
London who operated peacefully and could have prevailed.
For all their intensity, Ireland’s internal arguments would be
manageable, were it not for another spectre. That is Brexit, and
the risk that Ireland might again have to choose between conti-
nental Europe and a non-European Britain. In Mr Kenny’s cau-
tious words, this outcome could cause “serious diﬃculty” for
Northern Ireland, whose peace deal is predicated on the United
Kingdom and the Irish republic (and thus both bits of Ireland) be-
ing in the union and working together to get European beneﬁts.
To see, at a deeper level, why Brexit is unwelcome, take anoth-
er history lesson. In centuries past, England, Ireland and the con-
tinent made an ugly triangle. England saw Ireland as a soft under-
belly which continental foes might exploit; Irish patriots looked
to the continent for succour. In 1798, Irish rebels deﬁed the Crown,
aided by France; the insurgents of 1916 took help from Germany.
When Britain and Ireland both joined the then European Eco-
nomic Community in 1973, a prettier shape emerged. As formally
equal partners, the two Anglophone lands collaborated in Brus-
sels. Ireland was keener on farm aid than Britain; but over trade
and regulation, British and Irish eyes often met. Ireland gained
continental links without sacriﬁcing its ties to Britain. This happy
alignment will end if Britain marches out, leaving Ireland lonely.
Some wonder if it might feel pressured to leave the EU, too. Irish
manufacturers fear paying duties on British-made inputs; and if
Britain eased regulations on its own businesses, their Irish com-
petitors, following European rules, would howl. 

Brits not out
Horror of Brexit unites politicians in opposite corners. Ask two
youngish members of the new legislature. Paschal Donohoe, the
Fine Gael transport minister, says he has enjoyed working with
Britain in Europe, for example to support liberal aviation regimes;
but with or without Britain, Ireland will stay in the EU. Despite
Britain’s absence, Ireland has beneﬁted from the “competitive rig-
our” of the single currency, he believes. Eoin O’Broin, newly elect-
ed to parliament for Sinn Fein, loathes the idea of an EU external
frontier running through Ireland. But whatever Britain does, he
wants to be in the heart of European politics, ﬁghting Mr Dono-
hoe’s liberal ideas alongside leftist allies such as Syriza of Greece,
or Jeremy Corbyn’s Labour Party in Britain. 
For centuries, Irish people have found ingenious ways to di-
vide their lives between the two islands, even when relations
were frosty or worse, as they were in 1916. Britain and Ireland
have long used diﬀerent currencies: that has been a nuisance, not
a catastrophe. The reappearance of a customs and security bor-
der between north and south would be more serious. Geography
and kinship mean the two countries must muddle along. But
even for Irish anglophiles, choosing Britain over Europe would
be almost unthinkable. That is the newest lesson of Easter 1916. 7

AS A small, cosmopolitan European capital, Dublin is a delight
to visit. Georgian mansions recalling its role as the second
city of the British Isles alternate with boutiques and cafés, buzz-
ing with chatter in Spanish or Polish. And in the smart centre, the
economic upturn is now palpable. On paper at least, the country
has rebounded from recession and bail-out, posting GDP growth
last year of 7.8%, ﬁve times the euro-zone average. 
But there is something else in the spring air. Adorning many
handsome facades there are sepia posters of men bearing riﬂes.
Over Easter weekend, the bustle will cease as Ireland commem-
orates a founding moment: the weeklong uprising in 1916, during
the ﬁrst world war; it is recalled in British annals as a stab in the
imperial back and in Irish ones as a heroic self-sacriﬁce. 
The execution of its leaders, as much as the Easter Rising itself,
triggered a maelstrom of events: a surge of anti-British rage and
harsh counter-repression; a treaty in 1921 establishing two Irish
parliaments (a northern one inside the United Kingdom, a south-
ern one outside); and a civil war between supporters and oppo-
nents of that compromise.
Those wounds still fester. In other countries, historical cere-
monies help transcend domestic squabbles. Not in Ireland, stuck
in a deep political impasse, only explicable via the feuds of the
past. Fine Gael, a centre-right party whose forebears backed the
1921 accord, has just lost control of the legislature after an election
in which its vote slumped to 25.5%. Nor was there a triumph for its
rival, Fianna Fail, a party of pragmatic centrists who descend
from opponents of the 1921 deal. It improved its score but only to
24.3%. Neither can easily form a government and each mistrusts
the other. 
With the combined tally of the civil war-based parties now
below 50%, is Ireland exorcising old demons and looking ahead?
No such luck. The next biggest parliamentary bloc is Sinn Fein,
with a 13.8% share; it claims to be the main moral heir of the 1916
insurgency (and will stage separate commemorations next
month). Far more ﬁercely than Fianna Fail, Sinn Fein views all the
political arrangements which followed the 1916 rising as a betray-
al. Although it now shares power in Northern Ireland’s govern-
ment, it also insists that its military wing, the Irish Republican
Army, was justiﬁed in its 25-year war, ending in the mid-1990s, to

30

Br itain

The Economist March 26th 2016

Also in this section

31 Brexit br ief: Trade

32 Bagehot: The divided, ruling Tor ies

Fiscal policy

In it together?

2

+

0

–

2

May 2010-Apr il 2015

May 2015-Apr il 2019*

All r ight for some

Br itain, working-age households with children, % change

Impact of tax and benef it reforms on net income

The balance of tax and welfare changes is tilting further in favour of the rich
THE Conservative government was
elected last year on a promise to ﬁx Brit-
ain’s public ﬁnances. In coalition with the
Liberal Democrats in 2010-15, the Conser-
vatives had shrunk the budget deﬁcit from
10% of GDP to 5%. Now freed of the need for
a coalition partner, they want to eliminate
the deﬁcit entirely by 2020. In the quest to
balance the books, they maintain that “we
are all in this together”, pushing back
against the popular perception that the
Conservatives are the party of the rich.
Their claim has been undermined by a
controversy over disability beneﬁts. To
save about £1 billion ($1.4 billion) a year by
2020, in the budget on March 16th the gov-
ernment unveiled plans to cut the perso-
nal-independence payment (PIP), which
helps disabled people with their higher
costs of living. The amount awarded to
those who use an “aid or appliance” (such
as a magnifying glass or a ceiling hoist)
would fall. Though the proposal was sub-
sequently withdrawn, Iain Duncan Smith,
the work and pensions secretary, resigned
on the grounds that it epitomised the gov-
ernment’s regressive approach to deﬁcit re-
duction. Mr Duncan Smith’s true motives
are less noble (see Bagehot). But he points
out an uncomfortable truth: since return-
ing to oﬃce last year, the government has
been increasingly hard on the poor.
Beneﬁt cuts under the coalition govern-
ment of 2010-15 hit the needy hardest. That
is unsurprising: for a working-age house-

hold in the bottom income quintile, bene-
ﬁts are worth about 45% of gross income,
compared with just 2% for one in the top
quintile. And many reforms were reason-
able: for instance, the number of claimants
of disability living allowance (DLA), which
oﬀers cash for disabled folk, tripled in 1992-
2010, with a 369% real-terms rise in spend-
ing on people claiming for back pain. The
government says that 70% of those on DLA
were receiving indeﬁnite awards, meaning
they continued to receive money even if
they got better. The phasing in of the PIP
from 2013 toughened eligibility criteria. 
What’s more, the labour market came
to the rescue of many of those who lost

Source: Institute for Fiscal Studies

4

6

8

10

12

14

10

Richest

Poorest

INCOME DECILE

*Forecast

For daily analysis and debate on Br itain, visit

Economist.com/br itain

most from tax and beneﬁt changes. By 2015
there were 1m fewer unemployed people
than four years before. The employment
rate was at the highest level since records
began. Increasing work incentives through
reform of the welfare state may have been
partly responsible. But
improving eco-
nomic conditions, largely beyond the gov-
ernment’s control, undoubtedly helped.
Thanks to the jobs boom, the living
standards of the poorest did not fall as
much as the tax and beneﬁt changes alone
implied. As bankers took smaller bonuses,
there were big income falls at the top of the
income distribution. The eﬀect was that a
household at the tenth percentile of the in-
come distribution (ie, among the poorest)
saw its income rise by 8% from 2007-08 to
2015-16, according to the Institute for Fiscal
Studies (IFS), a think-tank, compared with
a 3% fall for one at the 90th percentile. By
the end of the coalition government, in-
comes were more equal than before the re-
cession. The “we are all in this together”
dictum stood up.
Not any more. In its manifesto last year
the Conservative Party pledged to take £12
billion out of the working-age welfare bill
by 2017-18 (later postponed to 2019-20),
which has forced it to make some painful
decisions. A four-year freeze on things like
tax credits (wage top-ups for the low-paid)
and housing beneﬁt will start next month.
In-work beneﬁts will get less generous. On
March 22nd George Osborne, the embat-
tled chancellor, said there were “no further
plans” to cut welfare. Still, spending on
working-age beneﬁts will fall three times
as fast in this parliament as in the last one. 
The poor will be hit harder by these
policies than those of the coalition (see
chart). Not only are the cuts deeper, but
forthcoming changes seem more to do
with penny-pinching than real reform. The
abolition from next year of some child

1

The Economist March 26th 2016

2 beneﬁts for the third sprog onwards has lit-
tle economic rationale. Making unemploy-
ment beneﬁt stingier (Reform, a think-tank,
reckons it will be worth £550 a year less in
2020 than in 2010) may do more to reduce
the living standards of the jobless than
make them likelier to ﬁnd work.
By comparison, the proposed cuts to
PIP, now scrapped, were not so dreadful.
The number receiving extra money solely
as a result of needing aids or appliances
has tripled in the past 18 months. Court rul-
ings have broadened the scope of “aids
and appliances” to include things like beds
and chairs, which are needed by everyone.
Even if the reform had gone ahead, spend-
ing on disability beneﬁts would barely
have changed from its level last year.
Whatever the merits of particular cuts,
Mr Duncan Smith is right to complain that
targeting them at working folk is unfair
when oldies are so coddled. The govern-
ment has promised to protect state pen-
sions, which will rise yet again this year by
3%. Rich folk, meanwhile, are doing well. In
the budget the threshold for the higher rate
of income tax was increased from £42,385
to £45,000. The median full-time employ-
ee, who earns £28,000 a year, will not ben-
eﬁt. Even the pledge to raise the personal
allowance for income tax, from £10,600 to
£11,500, is not especially pro-poor because
over 40% of adults do not earn enough to
pay any income tax. 
Conservatives point out that they have
trimmed the incomes of the very richest
through measures like greater restrictions
on tax relief on pension contributions. The
plan to raise tax thresholds was spelled out
in their manifesto. But a move to cut the
rate of capital-gains tax (CGT), which will
most beneﬁt the asset-rich, was not. Of the
£30 billion of capital gains subject to CGT
in 2013-14, half went to 35,000 individuals
with incomes of £100,000 a year or more,
according to the Resolution Foundation, a
think-tank. 
The labour market is unlikely to oﬀset
the regressive eﬀects of the Conservatives’
latest welfare changes, as it did in 2010-15.
Unemployment cannot fall much lower.
Wages are looking shaky, with growth-pro-
jections recently revised downwards. The
government counters that a new “national
living wage”, which will rise to 60% of me-
dian earnings by 2020, makes up for the
welfare cuts. In fact, many of the very poor-
est are not in work; middle-income house-
holds will be the biggest winners, because
many of those on the minimum wage are
second earners in higher-income families.
A household in the seventh decile will
beneﬁt three times more from the living
wage than one in the bottom.
The government talks a good game on
sharing the pain around; during the co-
alition with the Lib Dems it was broadly
true. But under current plans, the slogan is
looking increasingly empty. 7

Brexit br ief

Unfavourable trade winds

Br itain 31

It would be hard for Britain to negotiate good trade deals post-Brexit
T RADE is at the heart of the European
Union. Indeed, many Brexiteers claim
that in 1973 Britain joined a free-trade area
that only later morphed into political un-
ion. Leaving the union would not interrupt
trade with the continent for long, they sug-
gest, since a new free-trade deal could be
swiftly agreed. Yet the EU’s single market is
deeper than a free-trade zone. It dismantles
both tariﬀs and non-tariﬀ barriers involv-
ing standards, regulations or rules of ori-
gin. That explains why joining the EU
boosted Britain’s exports so much—as the
chart shows for former West Germany.
The EU is clear that non-members like
Norway can have full access to the single
market only if they accept most of the
rules, including the free movement of peo-
ple, and contribute to the EU budget. Swit-
zerland has less access (its banks, for in-
stance, are restricted in the services they
can oﬀer within the EU), yet it still accepts
most rules and pays into the budget.
Brexiteers argue that Britain, as Eu-
rope’s second-biggest economy, would use
its clout to get a better deal. They say Brit-
ain’s big trade deﬁcit with the rest of Eu-
rope means the EU needs the British mar-
ket more than the other way round. And if
no deal were done on single-market access,
they reckon relying on World Trade Organi-
sation (WTO) rules or having a free-trade
deal like Canada’s would be good enough.
Yet the atmosphere post-Brexit would
be frosty. The EU would have a big incen-
tive to be unhelpful, for fear that other
countries might copy Britain in leaving.
Even at the best of times, the EU ﬁnds it eas-
ier to deal with small countries; protection-
ist interests within Europe resist deals with
bigger ones. Any trade oﬀer from the EU re-
quires the approval of all 27 other member

countries, plus the European Parliament.
As for the trade deﬁcit, what matters is
the share of exports: some 45% of British
exports go to other EU countries, whereas
only around 7% of their total exports come
to Britain. It is true that German carmakers
would want to sell to the British market.
But several other countries run bilateral
deﬁcits with Britain or barely trade with it
at all; a deal would not interest them.
The WTO option would not remove
non-tariﬀ barriers, nor even tariﬀs on
many products, such as cars (which attract
a levy of around 10%). The Canadian deal
does not cover all goods. And both the
WTO and Canadian options omit most ser-
vices, including ﬁnancial ones, which
make up Britain’s biggest exports to the EU.
Rival ﬁnancial centres such as Paris, Frank-
furt and Dublin would seize the chance to
win back business following Brexit.
Hopes of easy trade deals with the rest
of the world also look illusory. Lawyers say
Britain would have to replace all the EU’s
53 free-trade pacts, which would be hard
with tough negotiators like South Korea or
Mexico. Several big countries, including
America, China and India, are negotiating
new deals with the EU, from which a post-
Brexit Britain would be excluded.
A free-trading Britain, say Brexiteers,
would no longer be held back by protec-
tionist EU members. But other countries’
trade negotiators might ﬁnd the British
market of 65m consumers less alluring
than the EU’s 500m. The top American
trade envoy, Mike Froman, has said his
country would not be interested in a bilat-
eral deal with Britain. Agreements that
China has signed with Iceland and Swit-
zerland are lopsided towards the Chinese. 
There are also practical problems. Be-
cause Britain has been in the EU for over 40
years, it has little experience of bilateral
trade negotiations. The rules for exit say a
trade deal with the EU should be done in
two years, yet this is optimistic—the Cana-
da deal took seven years and is still not rat-
iﬁed. Uncertainty over future trade pacts is
a big reason why economists think Brexit
would damage the British economy.
A former EU trade commissioner, Lord
Mandelson, says free-trade agreements
“do not come free, do not cover all trade
and take ages to agree.” He adds that trade
deals are “started by liberals but ﬁnished
by protectionists”. His conclusion is that a
post-Brexit Britain would end up with few-
er and worse trade deals than it has now. 7

Better in than out

Br itain’s share of West Germany’s impor ts, %

EEC FOUNDED

BRITAIN JOINS EEC

18

16

14

12

10

8

6

1956

60

65

70

75

80

Source: Berenberg

32 Br itain

The Economist March 26th 2016

Bagehot

E pluribus unum

The split between Iain Duncan Smith and George Osborne epitomises their party

Such divisions have always existed in Tory politics, but Mr
Duncan Smith’s resignation—like the ongoing wars over the EU—
crystallised them. Its aftermath saw his allies, like Ms Patel, clash
with Mr Osborne’s, like Ros Altmann, a pensions minister who
had worked under the welfare secretary. Word got out of Down-
ing Street that Mr Cameron had called his predecessor-but-one a
“shit” and blamed his ally, the chancellor of the exchequer, for
making a mess of what had been supposed to be a boringly safe
budget ahead of the EU referendum in June. The fray even gener-
ated glimpses of the leadership contest to come when the prime
minister steps down: Boris Johnson, London’s mayor, using an
appearance on a chat-show to declare Mr Osborne’s cuts unfair.
Local Conservative associations are furious about the prime min-
ister’s support for EU membership (and thus sympathetic to Mr
Duncan Smith’s ﬂounce) and there is dark muttering among MPs
about a bid to oust Mr Cameron after the referendum.
So it remains possible that the Conservative Party will disinte-
grate over its culture wars. The next leadership election could ex-
acerbate the splits, prompting Eurosceptics to peel away from
pro-globalisation, Europhile colleagues. The associations may
rise up against their own MPs. The Labour Party’s current hard-
left torpor could give some Conservatives a dangerous sense of
electoral immunity.
But therein lies the case for caution: the corollary of Tories
bickering when the going is good is that (much more so than La-
bour) they generally pull together if up against it. When Mr Os-
borne went before Parliament to defend his budget on March
22nd, for example, an expected drubbing turned into a triumph
as Conservative MPs bobbed up and down with friendly ques-
tions, cheering him when he answered. The same was true in the
previous parliament: despite violent eruptions over proportional
representation, House of Lords reform and gay marriage, the
party knuckled down in the months before the election and
helped the leadership win an unexpected majority at the polls.

It pays to disagree
In other words, the Conservative Party is a faithful product of
ﬁrst-past-the-post. It is a strikingly wide coalition spanning much
of British society, but one with the will to power that is needed to
subsume its diﬀerences in the cause of winning elections. Mr
Cameron encapsulates this. He is rooted in his own tribe, the
posh Berkshire set, which can make him blinkered and get him
into trouble. But he succeeds by being studiously vague and ob-
sessively competitive (advisers avow that he even takes pub quiz-
zes much too seriously); when presented with bad polls last year
he told aides to “physically attack me with the right words” to im-
prove things. This mix of constructive ambiguity and energetic
pragmatism is the route to victory in the British system.
Thus the Tories are still the party most likely to win the next
election. When Mr Cameron goes they will probably pick a simi-
larly mainstream replacement: Mr Osborne (down but not out
following the recent dramas), Mr Johnson (who is only disingen-
uously Eurosceptic), Theresa May (the underestimated home sec-
retary) or Stephen Crabb (Mr Duncan Smith’s dynamic replace-
ment). Bridging such a wide part of the electorate will keep
causing arguments, but it will also continue to give the Conserva-
tives a greater reach than Labour; the reason they ran Britain
alone for 47 years in the 20th century to Labour’s 22. In a country
where people are growing farther apart, internal diﬀerences may
prove as much an asset as a curse. 7

IT WAS dubbed the “Easterhouse epiphany”. In 2002 Iain Dun-
can Smith was shown around that Glasgow housing estate. The
then Conservative Party leader wept at the hopelessness he en-
countered on its litter-strewn streets and returned to London de-
termined to do something for those who had lost out under
Thatcherism. He was booted out of his job the following year, but
pursued his vision (a socially conservative, globalisation-sceptic
sort of Toryism) afterwards and in 2010 became work and pen-
sions secretary under David Cameron. In a party striving to shake
oﬀ its reputation for nastiness, his “Easterhouse modernisation”
contrasted with the more metropolitan brand of renewal on of-
fer: the “Soho” modernisation devised by well-heeled London
Tories like Mr Cameron and George Osborne, now chancellor of
the exchequer. This blended libertarian social policies with an in-
terest in quality of life and environmentalism.
Since then the diﬀerences between the Easterhouse and Soho
schools have sundered Mr Cameron’s government; never more
so than on March 18th when Mr Duncan Smith resigned as work
and pensions secretary. He blamed the government’s planned
cuts to disability beneﬁts: the culmination, he argued, of years of
unreasonable demands by the Treasury. In truth his motives
went deeper, concerning the EU referendum (he supports Brexit,
unlike the party leadership) and even styles of working, thus ex-
posing the tensions in a Conservative Party that spans multiple
classes, age groups, social circles and ideological camps. 
Indeed, this is just the latest chapter in the party’s long history
of inﬁghting. The Osborne-Duncan Smith split can even be com-
pared to those over the protectionist Corn Laws in the 1840s (a
wider argument which gave birth to this newspaper) or over
European integration in the early 1990s. Which points to an awk-
ward truth: were it not for Britain’s ﬁrst-past-the-post electoral
system, which rewards large, broad parties, the Conservatives
would not sit together in Parliament at all. Under a proportional
system, Mr Osborne might work with Blairites from Labour and
free-market Lib Dems in a liberal party. Mr Cameron might join
him, or lead his own Christian Democrat party. Mr Duncan Smith
might club together with conservative Labourites like Andy
Burnham. Other Tory MPs, like Priti Patel, might join ﬁgures from
the anti-EU UK Independence Party in a new right-populist outﬁt. 

Middle East and Afr ica

The Economist March 26th 2016 33

Also in this section

34 A ceaseﬁre in Yemen?

34 The Kurds: strong but divided

35 Apostasy and Islam

36 Ethiopia’s Oromo protests

36 Press freedom in east Afr ica

For daily analysis and debate on the Middle East
and Afr ica, visit

Economist.com/world/middle-east-afr ica 

tweaks Kuwait, the UAE and Qatar, which
have small populations and high foreign-
exchange reserves, can get by for a decade.
But the other three states are in a trickier
position. Oman and Bahrain have relative-
ly low reserves. Oman posted a larger than
expected budget deﬁcit in 2015, at almost
16% of GDP. By the end of 2017 Bahrain’s
debt is expected to reach 65% of GDP. It
needs an oil price of $120 to balance its
books. The two have other concerns, too.
Bahrain’s Shia-majority population bris-
tles at being ruled by a Sunni monarchy.
There is a lack of leadership in Oman; Sul-
tan Qaboos is, again, in Germany being
treated for suspected cancer.
Observers are particularly concerned
about Saudi Arabia, which Barack Obama
will visit to meet Gulf leaders next month.
It has huge foreign-currency reserves—
roughly $740 billion at the end of 2014—but
is drawing them down at a clip, taking out
about $115 billion in 2015. At 30m, its popu-
lation is the Gulf’s biggest, and it has a
sprawling royal family to pamper.
Happily, predictions that the oil price
will not rise quickly are focusing minds on
all sorts of structural reforms. “This is good 

1

U.A.E.

Qatar

Bahrain

Oman

Oil pr ice

Brent crude, $ per barrel

150

125

100

75

50

25

0

†

40

30

20

10
+
0
–
10

20

11

11

13

15*

17

2007 09

11

13

16

Sources: Thomson Reuters; CEIC; HSBC forecasts and estimates; national statistics; IMF

*Estimate †Forecast

Oil and the Gulf states

After the party

D U B A I A N D M U S C A T

before the crisis. Dubai, one of the emirates
making up the UAE, is an exception, with
oil accounting for only 5% of revenues.
That is because it has successfully diversi-
ﬁed: tourism and services account for most
of its government revenues. 
Governments are reacting to 
the
squeeze on their incomes with a mixture
of strategies, drawing down reserves and
taking on debt on the one hand, and im-
posing spending cuts on the other. Last
year they made tweaks, such as curbing
beneﬁts for public servants. This year will
be tougher. Oman has told all state-owned
enterprises to remove perks such as cars.
Qatari companies including Al Jazeera and
the Qatar Foundation, a cultural organisa-
tion, have laid oﬀ employees. With such

The low oil price is manageable in the short term; but the Gulf states must make big
changes to face the future
FAST cars whizz around, malls are full of
expensive luxuries and cranes domi-
nate the skyline. But scratch the shimmer-
ing surface of the Gulf and you soon ﬁnd
countries hurting from the low oil price,
currently around $40 a barrel. Growth is
slowing and unemployment
is rising.
Policymakers even dare utter a three-letter
“t” word until recently taboo: tax.
Oil is central to the six Gulf Co-opera-
tion Council (GCC) states, which have
used the windfall of the past few years to
spend lavishly. Unlike many oil exporters,
such as Nigeria and Venezuela, they have
high foreign-exchange reserves and low
debts to cover short-term gaps. But public
spending is generous and the private sec-
tor is heavily reliant on oil to boot. To be
sustainable in an era of lower prices, the
rulers must change the structure of their
economies. 
The IMF reckons the lower oil price
knocked $340 billion oﬀ Arab oil-export-
ing states’ government revenues in 2015.
This year is looking worse. Moody’s, a rat-
ings agency, this month downgraded Bah-
rain and Oman and put on watch the other
four GCC states: Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, the
United Arab Emirates (UAE) and Qatar.
“It’s the end of an era for the Gulf,” says Ra-
zan Nasser of HSBC in Dubai. “And we’re
only just starting to see the eﬀects.”
Oil receipts typically account for more
than 80% of GCC government revenues,
rising to over 90% of Saudi Arabia’s budget

Dragged down

% change on a year earlier

Saudi Arabia

2007 09

2007 09

As % of GDP

20

15

10

13

15* 17

GDP

5

+

0

–

5

10

†

Kuwait

Government budget-balance

34 Middle East and Afr ica

The Economist March 26th 2016

2 for the Gulf; it will be a rich period for poli-
cy-making,” says Nasser Saidi, an econo-
mist in Dubai. The UAE cut fuel subsidies
last year, and other states are following
suit. Bahrain removed subsidies on some
food items. Saudi Arabia raised the cost of
electricity and water. Oman is printing the
cost of the fuel subsidy on household elec-
tricity bills to prepare the population for
paying the whole lot.
But with real prices now near the subsi-
dised prices, there is less room for savings
from cuts than there was a few years ago.
And outgoings remain high. It is not just
that the Gulf states are committed to large
infrastructure projects—metros, ﬁnancial
centres, ports and railways. They spend bil-
lions of dollars on wages and handouts to
their rapidly growing populations. The rel-
atively young states need to spend cash on
education. And they are embroiled in cost-
ly wars in the region.
Making matters worse, cuts in spending
aﬀect the nascent private sectors where,
apart from the UAE and Bahrain, most ac-
tivity is linked to oil, such as services to the
industry; and to public spending, such as
construction. Economic growth is slowing.
“The lack of countercyclical measures is
amplifying the pain,” says Ms Nasser.
Banks are getting tougher on loans just
when the state wants to encourage more
small businesses. By some reckonings, the
private sector in the Gulf contributes less to
GDP now than in earlier decades.
The GCC countries need to do much
more if the books are to balance in the fu-
ture. Diversiﬁcation, long talked about, has
to happen now, although it is harder to do it
in bad times. Plans look good on paper—
encouraging tourism and logistics, for ex-
ample—but more uncertain in real life. Sau-
di Arabia is not keen on Westerners tram-
pling around the kingdom.
A modest value-added tax, long dis-
cussed, of up to 5%, will be introduced
across the region by 2018. Oman has raised
corporate tax from 12% to 15%. Other states
are considering taxing expatriates’
in-
comes. But above all, the public sector has
to stop acting as the main employer. That
would be a big shift. Gulf citizens have got
used to earning without doing much. Priv-
ate ﬁrms are not creating enough jobs to
keep up with the number of young people
graduating from university, and large expa-
triate workforces provide tough competi-
tion. Gulf rulers fear that cutting spending
would alter the social contract in which lar-
gesse buys their people’s quiescence.
But they have no choice. A new genera-
tion of younger leaders, such as Saudi Ara-
bia’s Muhammad bin Salman and Mu-
hammad bin Zayed in the UAE, are more
willing to make tough changes. The GCC
states have had an amazing few years in
which they built up infrastructure and
saved. But they did too little to prepare for a
post-oil future. Now they must catch up. 7

Yemen

Fighting to a
standstill

But talk of a ceaseﬁre proves premature
AS IS the way of the Middle East, when a
ceaseﬁre beckons the ﬁghting intensi-
ﬁes, as the ﬁghters try to press their advan-
tage before the jaw-jaw begins. No sooner
had Saudi Arabia talked last week of halt-
ing the year-long bombardment of its
much poorer neighbour than its air strikes
on Yemen resumed. The UN mediator, Is-
mail Ould Cheikh Ahmed, could barely
scramble from Sana’a before the capital
was struck. Another hundred Yemenis
were killed when bombs struck a market
in Hajja, a town near the Saudi border. Fur-
ther south, the armed Shia group known
as the Houthis, which seized the capital
along with much of the country in 2014,
continued shelling Taiz, a predominantly
Sunni city.
The deaths will probably change little.
The battle lines have stayed stubbornly
ﬁxed for months. Both sides seem aware
that a military victory is out of reach. After
a year of bombings, bombs lose their im-
pact. “We forget them in minutes,” says a
nonchalant Yemeni. In Sana’a the old
city’s once-empty alleyways are crowded
again. Somehow markets are full. The elec-
tricity grid is entirely down, but a surfeit of
solar panels has entered the country. Sau-
di-backed ﬁghters claim to have lifted the
Houthis’
siege of Taiz, but coalition
ground-forces seem loth to advance on the
capital or the Houthi strongholds further
north. And the administration the Saudis
have tried to re-establish in Aden, the
southern port, is dysfunctional and prone
to attack from al-Qaeda. The Emiratis, who
play second ﬁddle to the Saudis, are said to
have stopped their patrols.
Still, preliminary talks are stumbling
on. The warring parties are now negotiat-
ing directly in Saudi Arabia. Some ten days
of meetings led by the Houthi spokesman,
Muhammad Abdelsalem, have so far re-
sulted in a cessation of cross-border ﬁght-
ing and Houthi shelling of Saudi border
towns, as well as a prisoner swap. Saudi
advisers speak of following Russia’s exam-
ple by grounding most of their warplanes.
The broad outlines of a political deal,
too, seem to be slowly taking shape. The
Houthis could oﬀer the government in
Aden a refuge in Sana’a, where it would be
safe from al-Qaeda. In return the Houthis
would gain several key ministries and see
their militiamen taken onto the govern-
ment payroll. The Saudis could claim that
they have stopped another neighbouring
capital from falling into the hands of Irani-

Little left to save

an clients,while the Houthis could formal-
ise their presence at the heart of govern-
ment, much like Hizbullah in Lebanon.
Such, at least, is the road map. In reality,
Yemen is too battered for anything resem-
bling coherence or functioning central gov-
ernment to be quickly re-established. So
the population will continue to suﬀer. In
the Arab world’s poorest state, war has cut
incomes by almost half. Some 2.5m people
have been displaced; around 6,000 killed.
The UN says a third of the country’s 21m
people are in severe need of food. Other
than spur Yemeni loathing for Saudi Ara-
bia, the war has achieved little. 7

The Kurds

Containing
multitudes

E R B I L A N D G A Z I A N T E P

The Kurds have taken advantage of
chaos in the region, but remain divided
AFTER defeating Zuhak, an evil king with
serpents sprouting from his shoulders,
the Kurds celebrated by lighting the hill-
sides with ﬁre. The fable is remembered
each Nowruz, a holiday marking the start
of spring and the new year in late March.
The Kurds still celebrate by lighting ﬁres—
and, in the case of Kurdish soldiers near
Mosul, sending ﬂaming tyres down the
hillside toward the trenches of Islamic
State (IS).
The Kurdish forces in Iraq (where they
are known as peshmerga) and Syria are the
West’s most reliable allies in the ﬁght
against IS. They have won important victo-
ries in the towns of Kobane, on the Syrian
border with Turkey, and Sinjar in northern
Iraq. In the process, they have increased
and consolidated the territory under their
control. Thanks to the chaos created by IS, 

1

The Economist March 26th 2016

Middle East and Afr ica 35

2 the Kurds in each country are closer than
ever to achieving self-determination.
Yet a uniﬁed Kurdistan spanning the re-
gion’s borders is not in the oﬃng. Last
month Masoud Barzani, the president of
Iraq’s autonomous Kurdistan region,
called for a non-binding referendum on in-
dependence by the end of the year. State-
hood could eventually follow. But in Syria
the Kurds’ declaration of a federal region,
called Rojava, on March 17th, was framed
as a way of holding the country together,
not splitting it. Though left out of peace
talks, Kurdish leaders say Rojava could act

as a model for a decentralised Syria.
Syria’s Kurds may of course merely be a
step behind their Iraqi counterparts on the
way to independence. But that would belie
the rivalry between the dominant Kurdish
parties in each country. The Kurdistan
Democratic Party (KDP), led by Mr Barzani,
accuses the Democratic Union Party (PYD)
in Syria of lacking commitment to Kurdish
nationalism. The PYD has close ties to the
Turkey-based Kurdistan Workers’ Party
(PKK) of Abdullah Ocalan, who believes in
a confederation of Kurds, not full indepen-
dence, within current borders. The PYD

Apostasy and Islam

Not advised

The penalties for turning away from Islam can be quite stringent
“IF THERE is a God, atheism must
seem to Him as less of an insult than
religion,” Edmond de Goncourt, a French
writer, once said. He would not ﬁnd
much agreement in most of the Islamic
world. In late February a Saudi Arabian
man in his 20s was sentenced to ten years
in prison, a hefty ﬁne and 2,000 lashes
for professing his atheism on Twitter. He
could well have fared even worse. In 2014
Saudi Arabia passed a law equating
atheism with terrorism. When last year
another young man uploaded an online
video of himself tearing up a Koran,
Saudi courts sentenced him to death.
According to the International Hu-
manist and Ethical Union, a pressure
group, Saudi Arabia is one of only 19
countries in the world that criminalises
apostasy, the turning away from one
religion to another one, or to none; it is
one of 12 countries where it is punishable
by death. All but two of the latter group
are in the Middle East and Africa. In
practice, the death sentences are rarely
carried out; more commonly, apostates
are merely thrown in jail and tortured. 
Even countries with civil laws that do
not expressly outlaw apostasy still ﬁnd
creative ways to crack down on religious
deviation. In Oman, Kuwait and Jordan
Islamic courts can annul the marriages of
apostates or prevent them from inher-
iting property. In Pakistan couples who
convert from Islam risk having their
children taken away. 
Where laws against apostasy do not
exist, blasphemy laws are often applied
instead. In Egypt, a 21-year-old student,
Karim Ashraf Muhammad al-Banna, was
sentenced to three years in prison last
year after he broadcast his atheism on
Facebook. Atheism itself is not illegal in
Egypt; instead Mr al-Banna was charged
with insulting religion. Blasphemy laws
were famously applied in Pakistan too,

when, Asia Bibi, a Pakistani Christian,
was sentenced to death in 2010 after a
confrontation with a group of Muslim
women in which she supposedly de-
famed the Prophet Muhammad. Salman
Taseer, the governor of Punjab, who
defended Ms Bibi and railed against the
blasphemy laws, was murdered by his
own bodyguard in 2011. 
Not everyone in the region is so ar-
dent. Despite the great risks associated
with religious doubt in the Islamic world,
curiosity about atheism seems to thrive.
According to Google Trends, all of the
seven countries most interested in the
term “atheism” are in the Middle East.
Still, a survey by WIN/Gallup Interna-
tional in 2012 suggested that Brazilians
were more religious than Afghans and
Armenians more zealous than Iraqis.
Perhaps not wholly surprisingly, the
proportion of Saudis reporting them-
selves to be “convinced atheists” was
about the same as for Americans. 

No turning back

and the PKK shun capitalism, while the
KDP embraces it, in theory at least.
The tension is exacerbated by the KDP’s
co-operation with Turkey, home to a large
and restive Kurdish population. Turkish
leaders see the KDP as a palatable alterna-
tive to the PKK, which they blame for re-
cent attacks inside Turkey. Mr Ocalan sits in
prison, but ﬁghting between the govern-
ment and Kurds in south-eastern Turkey
has reached a bloody peak. By extension,
the government takes a dim view of the
PYD, which it has prevented from forming
a contiguous entity along the border in Syr-
ia by bombing Kurdish ﬁghters—and by
tacitly helping IS, claims the PYD.
The PYD portrays Rojava as a democrat-
ic and pluralistic place, but the party is ac-
cused of monopolising power and, in
some towns, of kicking out Arabs. Other
Kurdish groups, such as the local aﬃliate of
the KDP, have been sidelined and critics re-
pressed. While maintaining an uneasy
truce with the regime of Bashar al-Assad,
Syria’s embattled president, the PYD’s sol-
diers have attacked other rebels, including
other Kurds. “For the PYD, everyone is the
enemy,” says Sultan Jalaby, a Kurdish jour-
nalist who ﬂed Syria for Turkey. 
The KDP has done its share to alienate
the PYD, including digging trenches on the
Iraqi side of the border with Rojava. Mr
Barzani also has critics at home. Over the
objections of political rivals, the presi-
dent’s term in oﬃce has been extended in-
deﬁnitely due to the ﬁght against IS. Many
believe his call for a referendum was timed
to distract from more pressing problems.
The region has been cut oﬀ by Baghdad for
failing to send oil revenue to the central cof-
fers. Low oil prices, a bloated budget and
the inﬂux of nearly 2m refugees and dis-
placed persons have it drowning in debt.
The Kurds in Iraq and Syria are tighten-
ing their grip on disputed territories, such
as oil-rich Kirkuk in Iraq. But there is little
appetite abroad for the break-up of Iraq
and Syria. The declaration of a federal Ro-
java was rejected by America. The Kurds
may be winning ground; but peace among
them may prove to be more elusive. 7

T U R K E Y

Gaziantep

Kobane

A Z ER -
BA I JAN

A

R

M

E

N

I

A

AZ .

I R A N

a
e
S
n
a
e
n
a

r
r
t

e
di
e

Aleppo

Raqqa

S Y R I A

LEB.

Damascus

M

ISR.

JORDAN

Mosul

Erbil

Sinjar

Kirkuk

I R A Q

Baghdad

200 km

Areas of high Kurdish population
Iraqi Kurdistan
“Rojava”, area claimed by Kurds 

Areas of control (March 2016)

Kurds

Islamic State

Source: ISW 

 
36 Middle East and Afr ica

Unrest in Ethiopia

Grumbling and rumbling

A D D I S A B A B A

Months of protests are rattling a fragile federation
AN OUTBREAK of public protest unprec-
edented in its duration and spread
since the ruling party took power in Ethio-
pia in 1991 is stirring a rare cocktail of dis-
content. Demonstrations started in No-
vember mainly by members of the Oromo
ethnic group, which accounts for about a
third of Ethiopia’s 97m-plus people, have
refused to die down. Indeed, they have
spread. The government has dropped its
plan, the original cause of the hubbub, to
expand the city limits of Addis Ababa, the
capital, into Oromia, the largest of the fed-
eral republic’s subdivisions of nine region-
al states and two city-states. But the prot-
ests have billowed into a much wider
expression of outrage. People are com-
plaining about land ownership, corrup-
tion, political repression and poverty. Such
feelings go beyond just one ethnic group. 

Human-rights advocates and indepen-
dent monitors reckon that at least 80 peo-
ple and perhaps as many as 250, mostly de-
monstrators, have been killed since the
protests began. The government says the
true ﬁgure is much lower and instead lays
stress, as it always does, on terrorist and se-
cessionist threats to the country’s stability.
It points out that foreign-owned factories
have been attacked, churches burnt down
and property looted by organised gangs
during the protests. Last month seven fed-
eral policemen in the south were killed by
local militiamen during a particularly viol-
ent wave of disturbances. 
All the same, most of the protests have
been peaceful. The Oromo particularly re-
sent the sale or lease of land (almost all of
which is state-owned) by the government
to foreign investors. The government’s de-

Press freedom in east Afr ica

Pencil blunted

N A I R O B I

A celebrated cartoonist loses his strip
GADO has had no qualms about skew-
ering politicians of all persuasions in
23 years as a cartoonist for a host of east
African newspapers. But his unsparing
caricatures were apparently too close to
the bone for the Kenyan government:
Gado claims he was sacked from the
Nation Media Group (NMG), the region’s
largest private media company, after
pressure from the very top.
The satirist, whose real name is God-
frey Mwampembwa, agreed to take a
sabbatical in March 2015 after Tanzania
banned the EastAfrican, an NMG news-
paper, ostensibly because it wasn’t prop-
erly registered (despite having been sold
in the country for two decades). The real
problem, Gado was led to believe, was a
drawing of then-president, Jakaya Kik-
wete, half-naked, attended to by buxom
women named Incompetence, Corrup-
tion and Cronyism. In November he was
told his contract wouldn’t be renewed.
The termination came after a dispute
closer to home. Gado says that in Febru-
ary 2015 the oﬃce of William Ruto, Ken-
ya’s deputy president, complained about
his depiction in connection with a con-
troversial “land grab”. Gado says NMG
also put pressure on him to stop drawing

Mr Ruto wearing a ball-and-chain (repre-
senting a case brought against him by the
International Criminal Court for vio-
lence in 2007-8). President Uhuru Kenyat-
ta’s shackles disappeared when the ICC
dropped charges against him.
“One thing I will never allow is poli-
ticians to dictate what I draw,” says Gado,
who is suing NMG and penning cartoons.
The company denies bowing to govern-
ment demands and says Gado’s contract
came to “a natural end”. But the incident
comes amid a clampdown on Kenya’s
media, long seen as the continent’s liveli-
est after South Africa’s. A string of repres-
sive laws has been passed of late. Recent-
ly a counter-terrorism bill was used to
arrest bloggers who posted photos of
Kenyan soldiers killed in Somalia.
NMG is not the only media company
ridding its pages of outspoken journal-
ists. But if Gado’s claims are right it would
be disappointing because of its previous
history of fearless reporting. It also ﬁred a
managing editor, Denis Galava, in Janu-
ary, supposedly for publishing an editori-
al without getting proper approval from
the editor in chief. The article was head-
lined: “Mr President, get your act together
this year”.

The Economist March 26th 2016

cision to shelve its master plan to expand
Addis Ababa is regarded by the assorted
opposition as a rare step in the right direc-
tion. But the protesters say the government
must now allow Ethiopians to exercise
their constitutional right to express dissent,
or discontent could escalate.
The army was deployed to bolster the
federal police in the south. Both are regu-
larly accused of brutality and are generally
deemed able to operate with impunity.
Shooting at protesters and arbitrarily ar-
resting them, especially if they are stu-
dents, has a long tradition in Ethiopia, go-
ing back to the military dictatorship that
ran the country from 1974 until its downfall
in 1991. 
The government is particularly suspi-
cious of the Ethiopian diaspora, especially
its representation in America, which ﬂed
abroad during that period. The foreign-
based opposition, bolstered by social-me-
dia campaigners in America, is stirring
things up for its own malign purposes, says
the government. That, argues the opposi-
tion at home and abroad, is what it always
says when seeking to discredit peaceful
dissent. 
In any event, tension is bound to persist
because the ruling Ethiopian People’s Rev-
olutionary Democratic Front, which takes
China’s top-down style of authoritarian
government as a model, is loth to loosen
controls at the centre, despite the federal
constitution. For their part, critics of the
government cannot escape from the fact
that it has until now succeeded in holding
together a diverse collection of ethnic
groups. Moreover, under the current gov-
ernment the economy has boomed and
poverty has fallen sharply, though a severe
recent drought is causing new problems.
Neither the government nor the federal
system, however imperfect, is under im-
mediate threat. 
Meanwhile Western governments,
with America and Britain to the fore as
large donors of aid to Ethiopia, have been
notably silent about the turmoil. In a re-
gion battered by terrorism and violence in
such nearby places as Yemen, South Sudan
and Somalia, Ethiopia is still regarded as an
anti-terrorist bulwark. 7

500 km

SAUDI ARABIA

S U D A N

R

e

d

S

e

a

ERITREA

E T H I O P I A

Hajja

Y E M E N

Sana’a

Taiz

Aden
G

DJIBOUTI

 A d e n

f

o

l f

u

SOMALIA

Addis Ababa

O R O M I A

SOUTH
SUDAN

UGANDA

K E N Y A

 
United States

The Economist March 26th 2016 37

Also in this section

38 On the trail

38 College endowments

39 Deporting child migrants

40 Pr imar ies in the West

41 Flor ida’s Haitian-Amer icans

42 Lexington: The meaning of blue jeans

Trump and the world

Don’t deal with it

W A S H I N G T O N , D C

If Donald Trump wins the nomination he is likely to ditch half a century of
Republican thinking on foreign policy
CONVENTIONAL candidates for the
American presidency signal how they
might deal with the world in three main
ways. First, they are expected to issue de-
tailed foreign policies, though—in truth—
few of these plans are robust enough to
survive when stuﬀ happens. Next, by
choosing advisers known for strong views
or special expertise, candidates nod to
their own priorities. The third signalling
mechanism is the most nebulous but the
most useful, and happens when contend-
ers let slip some remark that betrays their
deepest prejudices and gut instincts.
Donald Trump, an unconventional can-
didate, has come a long way without re-
vealing very much about his views on for-
eign policy. He has oﬀered such bumper
sticker slogans as “Bomb the shit out of
ISIS”, and dodged questions about his pre-
ferred sources of geopolitical advice, re-
cently declaring: “I’m speaking with my-
self, number one, because I have a very
good brain.”
On March 21st, however, the Republi-
can front-runner visited Washington, DC
for a day of traditional foreign-policy chin-
stroking and speechifying. He joined presi-
dential rivals in addressing some 18,000
supporters of the American Israel Public
Aﬀairs Committee (AIPAC), an inﬂuential
pro-Israel lobby group, outlining his most
detailed thoughts yet on the prospects for

Middle East peace, on curbing Iran’s nuc-
lear ambitions and on defeating the viol-
ent extremists of the Islamic State. In an
earlier meeting at the Washington Post, he
revealed the names of ﬁve close foreign-
policy advisers.
Mr Trump’s AIPAC speech, which
unusually for him he read from a prepared
text, was a mixture of pandering, implausi-
ble bluster and contradictory promises.
The billionaire denounced the United Na-
tions as an anti-Israeli opponent of democ-
racy. “We will totally dismantle Iran’s glo-
bal terror network, which is big and
powerful—but not powerful like us,” he
promised, without further explanation. He
said he would “dismantle the disastrous
deal” struck by President Barack Obama to
curb 
Iran’s nuclear ambitions, 
then
seemed to say that he would enforce it, or
perhaps the sanctions regime that preced-
ed it, “like you’ve never seen a contract en-
forced before, folks, believe me.”
In recent months Mr Trump has set
nerves jangling among conservative sup-
porters of Israel by suggesting he would be
“neutral” in eﬀorts to broker peace be-
tween Israel and the Palestinians. When
speaking to AIPAC he cast himself as stern-
ly pro-Israeli, citing his role as Grand Mar-
shal of the 2004 “Salute to Israel” Parade in
New York and his daughter’s conversion to
Judaism after marriage as evidence.

For daily analysis and debate on Amer ica, visit

Economist.com/unitedstates
Economist.com/blogs/democracyinamer ica

Months after angering a gathering of Jew-
ish Republicans by fudging his views on
the status of Jerusalem, Mr Trump bowed
to conservative pressure and pledged that
he would move the American embassy to
that divided city, calling it “the eternal capi-
tal of the Jewish people”.
Yet Mr Trump also brought his constant
campaign-trail refrain about being a deal-
maker oﬀering America as a broker be-
tween Israel and the Palestinians. “Deals
are made when parties come together,
they come to a table and they negotiate.
Each side must give up something,” he told
delegates. Even suggesting that Israel might
have to give anything up in the name of
peace involves challenging conservative
shibboleths. In recent years, Republicans
have aligned themselves with the views of
Binyamin Netanyahu, the Israeli prime
minister, in suggesting that Israel should
not be prodded to engage in talks, because
the Palestinian side has shown no sincer-
ity or seriousness as a potential partner for
peace.
The little-known advisers named by Mr
Trump shed only limited light on his
views. They include Joseph Schmitz, a Pen-
tagon inspector general under George W.
Bush; Walid Phares, a Lebanese Christian
academic who has in the past advised war-
lords in Lebanon; J. Keith Kellogg Jr., a re-
tired army lieutenant-general and former
chief operating oﬃcer for the Coalition Pro-
visional Authority in Baghdad; and Carter
Page, a businessman and analyst specialis-
ing in the oil and gas industry in the former
Soviet block.
Where Mr Trump was more revealing
was in comments and asides that pointed
to his deep instincts on foreign policy—in-
stincts which mark a sharp break with re-
cent Republican orthodoxy. He seems

1

38 United States

The Economist March 26th 2016

2 ready to break with Republican traditions
of using America’s wealth, diplomatic
clout and military muscle to promote uni-
versal values of economic and political
freedom around the world—traditions
which have dominated the party since the
days of Ronald Reagan and the cold war.
Appealing to Americans who want to
feel safe from Islamic extremism but who
wonder what almost 15 years of interven-
tion in the Islamic world has achieved, Mr
Trump has spent months promoting an
America First policy of unleashing no-
holds-barred violence, including torture,
against foes in the Middle East, while shun-
ning nation-building far from home.
While doing the rounds in Washington
he expanded a little more than before on
those views. Asked at the Washington Post
about the future of NATO, the business-
man scolded other members of that Atlan-
tic alliance for doing too little after Russia
invaded Ukraine on their doorsteps. “Why
are we always the one that’s leading, po-
tentially the third world war, okay, with
Russia?” he asked. To the cable television

news station CNN, Mr Trump said that
while he would remain a member of
NATO he would “certainly decrease”
American funding for the alliance.
Asked about how to counter Chinese
aggression in the South China Sea and
Asia, Mr Trump again voiced long-stand-
ing gripes about how such allies as Japan
and South Korea only pay for some of the
costs of American bases in the region. Does
America gain anything by having bases
overseas, he was asked? “Personally I don’t
think so,” he replied.
Mr Trump keeps saying things like this.
At some point it seems reasonable to be-
lieve that what comes out of his mouth re-
ﬂects his views. Supporters love his mes-
sage of
chin-jutting, heavily armed
isolationism. If elected, President Trump
would be able to claim a mandate for end-
ing decades of global power projection. It
may be frustratingly hard to pin the Repub-
lican front-runner down on how, precisely,
he would deal with the world. But do not
discount the possibility that he intends to
deal with it as little as he can. 7

The pr imar ies

Heard on the trail

Let us drink beer
“Now that the label talks so loudly,
what’s in the bottle has lost its voice.”
A sommelier explains why she won’t serve
Trump wines. Washington Post

Old Testament
“God called King David a man after
God’s own heart even though he was an
adulterer and a murderer. You have to
choose the leader that would make the
best king or president and not necessarily
someone who would be a good pastor.”
Jerry Falwell, Jr. sees something in Donald
Trump. Liberty Champion

The reverse Godwin
“The truth is, by the way, they might be
rehabilitating that fellow with the mus-
tache back there in Germany.”
David Duke, former Grand Wizard of the
Ku Klux Klan and Trump fan, thinks com-
parisons of Mr Trump and Hitler might do
wonders for the latter’s image.

Barron’s ﬁnancial news
“I believe on occasion I used that name.”
When reporters called the Trump Organi-
sation in the 1980s they were sometimes
put through to a spokesman called John
Barron. Mr Trump later admitted in court
that he and Mr Barron were one and the
same. Washington Post

Faint praise
"He’s the best alternative to Donald
Trump."
Lindsey Graham endorsed Ted Cruz, who
he once said could be murdered on the ﬂoor
of the Senate without repercussions.

Bromance
"It was conservative erotica coming out
of his mouth. Oh tell me more big boy"
Glenn Beck, talk-radio and TV host ex-
plains why he’s supporting Ted Cruz.

Classy
Be careful, Lyin’ Ted, or I will spill the
beans on your wife!”
Mr Trump tweets.

The opium of the people
“The white American underclass is in
thrall to a vicious, selﬁsh culture whose
main products are misery and used her-
oin needles. Donald Trump’s speeches
make them feel good. So does Oxycontin.”
The National Review’s Kevin Williamson
examines the Trump phenomenon.

Half-right
“Washington has a very good football
team but it doesn’t have to be called the
Redskins.”
Bernie Sanders is generous to DC’s lousy
American football team.

College endowments

Yard sale

N EW Y O R K

Colleges with big endowments face
calls to scrap tuition payments
ON his deathbed in 1638, John Harvard
bequeathed half of his estate, about
£800 and his library of some 400 books to
a new college in present-day Cambridge,
Massachusetts. Harvard’s founders decid-
ed to name their new university for its ﬁrst
big benefactor. About 370 years ago the
ﬁrst Harvard scholarship to help “some
poore scholler” was set up thanks to £100
donated by Ann Radcliﬀe. The university
continues to be the beneﬁciary of gener-
ous donors. Last year, John Paulson, a
hedge-fund investor, donated $400m to
Harvard’s engineering school, its largest
gift ever. Harvard has an endowment of
$36 billion, the largest in the country. Last
year it raised more than $1 billion. Some of
its alumni think this ought to be suﬃcient
to scrap tuition fees.
Among them are Ralph Nader, a veter-
an political activist, and Ron Unz, author
of a number of searing articles on Ameri-
can meritocracy. Both are hoping to win
election to the university’s board of over-
seers, from which perch they will push to
make Harvard free for all students to at-
tend, and also pressure its admissions of-
ﬁce to disclose data on how it chooses
which students to admit. They hope that
other well-endowed Ivies would then be
shamed into doing the same.
America’s universities raised a record
$40.3 billion last year, according to the
Council for Aid to Education. Harvard’s en-

1

Sticker shock

Amer ican pr ivate universities*
Average annual tuition fees, $’000

Published

40

30

20

10

0

Net of f inancial aid

1991

95

2000

05

10

16

Median per student, $’000

By size of university endowment, $

0

20

40

60

80

>1bn

250m-1bn

100m-250m

<100m

Sources: College
Board; Moody’s

Net tuition
Educational
expenses

*Non-prof it, pr ivate
four-year courses

The Economist March 26th 2016 

United States 39

Deporting child migrants

Self-defence

Can toddlers represent themselves in
court? At the moment, yes
WHEN G.J.C.P., as she is known in court
documents, was 13, gang members in
her native El Salvador began tormenting
her. The men oﬀered her drugs, nagged her
to get involved with them romantically
and urged her to join their gang. G.J.C.P. re-
fused, though the men had previously
murdered a friend of hers for a similar of-
fence. Fearful for her life and hoping to be-
gin anew, she ﬂed to America. Before she
could get far, she was scooped up by border
patrol agents in Hidalgo, Texas.
Like many undocumented, unaccom-
panied migrant children, G.J.C.P. has no
lawyer to represent her in her deportation
proceedings. By law, migrants facing re-
moval are assured the right to an attorney.
They do not, however, have the right to a
free one—only defendants in criminal
cases do. If they can aﬀord the $2,000-
$10,000 it costs to process most deporta-
tion cases, unaccompanied migrant chil-
dren are welcome to appear in court with a
lawyer. If not, they are expected to seek
help from non-proﬁt organisations, which
are stretched, or to represent themselves
against government prosecutors. In the
91,104 deportation cases involving unac-
companied migrant children between
2004 and 2014, 46% of the plaintiﬀs have
not had legal representation. Ninety per-
cent of those who represented themselves
were deported, while only 39% of children
with lawyers were. 
The number of children from Guatema-
la, Honduras and El Salvador crossing the
border with Mexico began to rise steeply in
2012, after people-smugglers discovered
that their odds of success were better with
minors, who cannot so easily be turned
back by border guards, than with adults
and changed their business model accord-

1

Following the north star

Unaccompanied children apprehended at the
Mexico/US border, by countr y of or igin, ’000

El Salvador
Guatemala
Honduras
Mexico

2009

10

11

12

13

14

15

Source: US Customs and Border Protection

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

Mr Har vard and his yard

2 dowment is made up of 13,000 funds and
is its largest source of revenue by far. En-
dowments are not usually used to lower
tuition fees, but they can be used to pro-
vide scholarships and ﬁnancial aid to stu-
dents who cannot aﬀord to pay (70% of stu-
dents at Harvard get some assistance with
fees and living costs).
Some 
lawmakers
are wondering
whether threats to change the tax-exempt
status of endowments might be used to
persuade colleges to bring down the cost
of tuition, which has increased by 220% in
real terms since 1980. Nexus Research and
Policy Centre (a group set up by the Univer-
sity of Phoenix, which is for-proﬁt and
therefore not tax-exempt) says colleges re-
ceive $80 billion in support from state and
local government every year, which ought
to give politicians some leverage in return.
In January Tom Reed, a Republican con-
gressman from New York, proposed a bill
requiring endowments with assets of
more than $1 billion to allocate 25% of their
income for ﬁnancial aid or lose tax-exempt
status. Two congressional committees, the
Senate Finance Committee and the House
Ways and Means Committee, have sent let-
ters to the heads of the colleges with the
biggest endowments asking about spend-
ing, conﬂicts of interest and fee arrange-
ments for money managers. The 56 largest
private university endowments have until
April 1st to explain how they use their tax-
free investment earnings.
The colleges have their defenders.
“Most of these places are already provid-
ing a fair amount of ﬁnancial aid for stu-
dents well beyond the poverty line,” says
Kim Rueben of the Tax Policy Centre. Kevin
Weinman, Amherst’s chief ﬁnancial oﬃ-
cer, says his university’s endowment pro-
vides more than $30m to the college’s bud-
get, more than tuition, room board and
various fees combined. This school year, it
will spend $50,000 per student to fund ﬁ-

nancial aid, pay faculty and fund student
activities. After Congress last examined
the topic in 2007, more colleges began to
award grants instead of loans. Financial
aid has doubled over the past decade.
Some schools, like Brown in Providence,
Rhode Island also make voluntary pay-
ments in lieu of property taxes.
In addition to pointing out their gener-
osity, colleges also argue that forcing them
to spend endowment money on free tu-
ition might even be illegal. Donors can re-
strict their tax-exempt gift to a legally-bind-
ing particular purpose, such as creating a
chair, establishing a scholarship or build-
ing a new lab. Around 70% of endowments
are restricted funds. Not abiding by a do-
nor’s wishes can result in a lawsuit. Prince-
ton was sued by the heirs of the A&P groc-
ery fortune who claimed a gift of $35m
made in 1961 was misused and not spent as
directed. Amherst, which has a $2.2 billion
endowment, ran the numbers and found
that if it increased annual spending to 8%
from its current level of 4-5%, it would have
to rely on tuition to fund running costs.
After 25 years its endowment would be
60% smaller than it is now.
If the wealthiest colleges already spend
so much on ﬁnancial aid, where is the pro-
blem? Mr Unz argues that relentless en-
dowment-fuelled spending on new build-
ings, sports facilities and the hiring of
administrators has created an arms-race in
higher education, pushing up prices at
those universities that are not fortunate
enough to have lots of generous benefac-
tors. Harvard could scrap tuition payments
without damaging its ﬁnances or touching
the restricted portion of its endowment, he
reckons. Furthermore, the abolition of
both complicated ﬁnancial-aid forms and
terrifying sticker-prices for tuition (ie, be-
fore ﬁnancial aid is calculated) could, he ar-
gues, do much to encourage applicants
from beyond the plutocracy. 7

40 United States

The Economist March 26th 2016

2 ingly. The federal government responded
by speeding up the deportation of child
migrants in July 2014. This message seems
to have reached Central America: in 2015
the number of unaccompanied children
picked up by border patrol dropped back
down to 40,000. For those already in the
country, the government increased fund-
ing for child migrants in court, but not by
enough to assure they all get lawyers. Ado-
lescents over 16 were excluded from the ini-
tiative entirely.
A few days after the federal govern-
ment changed tack, a team of civil-liberties
groups, advocacy organisations and priv-
ate law ﬁrms launched a nationwide class-
action lawsuit against the attorney-gen-
eral’s oﬃce for failing to provide migrant
children with representation in deporta-
tion proceedings. Not doing so, they ar-
gued, violates immigration laws and the
5th Amendment right to due process. On
March 24th, after nearly two years of back
and forth, a judge will rule on whether to
certify the plaintiﬀs’ proposed class: all
children under 18 involved in immigration
proceedings after July 2014, who do not
have attorneys and are unable to aﬀord
one. Should the judge reject the certiﬁca-
tion, the case will press forward to a trial in
September with just a handful of plaintiﬀs.
Both Eric Holder, the former attorney-
general, and Loretta Lynch, the present
one, have expressed dismay at the current
state of aﬀairs. One immigration judge has
said he had “taught immigration law liter-
ally to three- and four-year olds.” Eleni
Wolfe-Roubatis of the Centro Legal de La
Raza, a non-proﬁt group in Oakland, Cali-
fornia, says that she has seen a child as
young as 18-months old in proceedings on
their own. When Ms Wolfe-Roubatis later
took on the 18-month-old girl as a client,
she held the infant in her arms as she made
her pleadings. Kathryn Coiner-Collier,
who works with unaccompanied migrant
children in North Carolina, describes how
lawyerless four- and ﬁve-year-olds ﬁdget
and play around in their hearings.
Unaccompanied child migrants often
struggle even to make it to court to defend
themselves. Atenas Burrola, another im-
migration lawyer in North Carolina who
serves low-income clients, explains that
undocumented people cannot get driving
licences in many states, and anyway lots of
the children in deportation proceedings
aren’t old enough to drive. She recalls one
15-year-old boy who had to shell out $300
each way for a taxi from his home in South
Carolina to immigration court in North
Carolina. Unrepresented children have
missed more than 70% of their court ap-
pearances since 2005, and are often or-
dered to be deported in absentia. This was
the case for G.J.C.P. When her grandmother
called to check the status of her case, she
learned a judge had already ordered her
granddaughter to be removed. 7

Stop Trump HQ

Pr imar ies in the West

Mormons against the Donald

W A S H I N G T O N , D C

Donald Trump and Hillary Clinton bag Arizona, but falter in Utah
THE Republican primary contest, for so
long overcrowded, has been reduced to
a single main contest: between Donald
Trump and those trying to stop him bag-
ging the 1,237 delegates he needs to win the
party’s presidential nomination. Besides
Ted Cruz and John Kasich, Mr Trump’s
bruised but surviving competitors, his op-
ponents include most elected Republicans,
most conservative journalists, perhaps
half of Republican voters. On March 22nd
the tycoon caused them further dismay by
winning the Arizona primary. Its 58 dele-
gates are a handsome prize and Mr Trump,
having won the “winner-takes-all” state
with just under half of the vote, got the lot.
With 739 delegates overall, he is the
only candidate with a serious chance of se-
curing the Republican nomination before
the party’s convention in July. It looks aw-
fully tight; a reckoning of his prospects in
the states still to vote suggests he might just
fall short. For that, his opponents can now
thank Mr Cruz’s coterminous success in
Utah, where the Texan senator won easily,
securing a rare statewide majority in the
Republican contest and taking all its 40 de-
legates. Mr Cruz was heavily backed by the
state’s Mormons, who represent most of
Utah’s Republican primary electorate. As
the sort of outsider group Mr Trump loves
to pick on, its members dislike him. He also
antagonised them further by questioning
the Mormon faith of Mitt Romney, the

most recent Republican presidential candi-
date and a leader of the emerging Stop
Trump eﬀort. Mr Trump came third in
Utah.
The Democratic contests held on March
22nd, in the same two states and in Idaho,
showed a similar pattern. The party’s
front-runner, Mrs Clinton, won comfort-
ably in delegate-rich Arizona, with three-
ﬁfths of the vote. But she was well-beaten
by Bernie Sanders in the two smaller
states. In Idaho and in Utah the leftist sena-
tor won around 80%. Mrs Clinton won
fewer delegates, but with an overall lead of
over 300 delegates she still looks uncatch-
able. The extremity of her defeats was em-
barrassing, though, and left her rival nicely
primed for an upcoming series of states he
could win, including Alaska, Hawaii and
Washington on March 26th.
In winning Arizona, Mr Trump and Mrs
Clinton appeared, albeit in the absence of
exit polls, to have once again conﬁrmed
their main strengths. Mr Trump was popu-
lar with the many whites in the border-
state who worry about illegal immigra-
tion. A large section of the wall he has
promised to hide Mexico behind would be
in Arizona, whose most divisive public ﬁg-
ure, Sheriﬀ Joe Arpaio, a well-known im-
migrant-basher, had endorsed him. Mrs
Clinton, correspondingly, was supported
by the state’s older white and large non-
white populations. Having won big in Ari-
zona, she will look forward more conﬁ-
dently to California, which has 546 dele-
gates, up for grabs on June 7th, and a
somewhat similar ethnic mix.
For those hoping to block Mr Trump, Mr
Cruz’s triumph in Utah is a rare ﬁllip. He
had been expected to win the state; it was
unclear that he would pass the 50% thresh-
old required to take all its delegates—in par-
ticular because of uncertainty over the ef-
fect of Mr Kasich in splitting the anti-Trump
vote. The trouble for Mr Cruz, who has
now won eight states to Mr Trump’s 20, is
that he only seems able to win in places,
such as Utah, with rare concentrations of
evangelicals, Mormons or the otherwise
ultraconservative. And there are not many
such places left to vote. In only a handful,
including Montana and Indiana, do evan-
gelicals and Mormons make up more than
30% of the population; together they ac-
count for just 146 of the 905 Republican de-
legates still in play. That makes Mr Trump’s
target, to win 60% of the remaining dele-
gates, look achievable. 7

The Economist March 26th 2016

Flor ida’s Haitian-Amer icans

The Creole caucuses

M I A M I

Just possibly, the road to the White House might run through Little Haiti
AMONG the shelves in Libreri Mapou, a
bookshop in a row of pastel-fronted
stores in Little Haiti, is a dull-looking door.
Beyond it, up a staircase, lies a technicolour
trove of paintings, statues, embroidery,
memorabilia of bygone political cam-
paigns and honours awarded to the propri-
etor, Jan Mapou. Imprisoned under Papa
Doc Duvalier, Mr Mapou ﬂed, moving to
Miami in 1984 and establishing himself as a
radio host, Creole-language advocate and
poet. For years activists, lawyers and artists
gathered above his shop.
They still do, though much of the action
has moved around the corner to the swish
Little Haiti Cultural Centre. A candidate in
Haiti’s disputed presidential race recently
spoke in its classy theatre (many locals can-
not vote in their ancestral homeland, but
their remittances, estimated by the World
Bank at $1.1 billion in 2012, give them a say);
one of the centre’s galleries currently dis-
plays photos of Little Haiti by youngsters
from Little Havana, and vice versa. In his
adjacent studio Edouard Duval-Carrié, a
Haitian-born artist, creates haunting noc-
turnal beach scenes, etched in glitter—a
skeleton in a voodoo suit, a gunboat on the
horizon—intended, he says, to illuminate
the darkness behind rich-world fantasies
of the tropics.
The short stroll from Libreri Mapou to
the cultural centre maps the evolving con-
tours of the Haitian-American community.
Built by the city government and opened
in 2009, the centre is a testament to the
community’s growing inﬂuence; the resil-
ient links to Haiti exemplify the hybrid
identities many immigrants now main-
tain. In a twist characteristic of this post-
modern era of powerful diasporas and
hotly contested microconstituencies, these
features—Haitian-Americans’ 
progress,
and their long memories—might play a role
in November’s presidential election.

Little Haiti, big mural

the 1980s. Less educated, slower to assimi-
late, they were also stigmatised by a sup-
posed association with AIDS.
In Miami’s bubbling ethnic stew, the
tensions of those years have only partly
dissipated. Among Haitian-Americans, as
others, resentment lingers over Cubans’
preferential immigration status. As Mr Ma-
pou puts it, Haitians had the extra misfor-
tune to be victimised by a right-wing dicta-
tor, and so instead of the “red-carpet
treatment” were liable to detention and re-
patriation. There has been friction with
black Americans over jobs and local poli-
tics—though younger Haitians are much
readier than their elders to see themselves
as African-American, too. “When my son
walks down the street, he is black,” says
Sandy Dorsainvil, the cultural centre’s di-
rector. “Colour shows ﬁrst.” 
Beneath that convergence, though, his-
tories are diﬀerent—which gives hope to
Michael Barnett, chairman of Palm Beach
County’s Republicans. In the past, he says,
Haitian-American votes have been taken
for granted by the Democrats and “written
oﬀ by Republicans”. But Haitians are not
instinctively suspicious of his party as oth-
er black Floridians are. Many are socially
conservative; rising numbers are well-oﬀ.

The Port-au-Prince primary
Counting immigrants and their descen-
dants, there are oﬃcially around 1m Hai-
tian-Americans, a population swollen by
successive political and natural calamities
(the true ﬁgure is doubtless higher). Almost
half live in Florida, especially in and
around Miami; in some counties they rep-
resent the biggest minority group. An early,
small wave escaped Duvalier’s regime in
the 1960s, largely for New York; a bigger,
poorer, more rural one arrived, mostly in
Florida and by boat rather than plane, in

United States 41

Mr Barnett points, as a model, to the 2014
campaign of Rick Scott, Florida’s governor,
who visited Haitian evangelical churches
and ran radio adverts in Creole.
But perhaps the main ground for Re-
publican optimism involves events in Hai-
ti itself—in particular, allegations of mis-
management in the relief eﬀort following
the earthquake of 2010. Various agencies
are implicated, but, overwhelmingly, one
surname: Clinton. Bill was a UN envoy, Hil-
lary secretary of state. As well as botching
the aid, she is widely thought to have
strong-armed Michel Martelly, the un-
loved former leader, into oﬃce. Some still
grumble about Bill Clinton’s ruinous insis-
tence, as president, that Haiti drop its rice
tariﬀs. He cannot have anticipated that this
arcane bit of trade policy might one day in-
terfere with his wife’s presidential bid.
Even if these gripes merely keep some
would-be Democrats at home, they might
matter. Florida’s result was the country’s
closest in the election of 2012. In 2000, of
course, Al Gore lost it, and the presidency,
by 537 votes. “If 537 Haitians decide not to
go to the polls,” the outcome could change,
says Jean Monestime, a Democrat who
came by boat as a teenaged refugee, with
no English, and is now chairman of the Mi-
ami-Dade county commission. Jean-Phil-
ippe Austin, an oncologist and Democratic
fundraiser, says he has advised the Clin-
tons that Haitian-American votes “aren’t
going to be automatic.” Mrs Clinton needs
to explain the relief eﬀort, he says.
Still, some countervailing factors en-
dure. Immigration policy remains a lead-
ing concern; should he be the Republican
nominee, Donald Trump’s xenophobia is
unlikely to go down well. Overall Florida’s
Haitian-Americans are still poorer than av-
erage and more likely to be jobless. Gepsie
Métellus of the Sant La Haitian Neighbour-
hood Centre, which oﬀers employment
and health-care services, frets that some
Haitian teenagers are emulating the “bad
boy” personas of their renegade peers. 
Yet, as is common in modern cities,
even as Haitian-Americans struggle with
hardship they also face the deracinating ef-
fects of prosperity. “Gentriﬁcation is in full
force now,” says Father Reginald Jean-
Mary of Notre Dame D’Haiti Catholic con-
gregation. “It is Little Haiti in name only.”
As Miami’s downtown and smart brands
encroach on the old neighbourhood, rising
rents are pushing people out, even as oth-
ers leave voluntarily for more space and
better schools. They trek back for Notre
Dame’s child-care programmes and Creole
services in the beautiful new church: one
stained-glass window depicts Christ wel-
coming a boatload of refugees, Miami’s
skyline looming behind them. Meanwhile,
in an area recently considered dicey, tour-
ists now come to browse Haitians crafts. “It
doesn’t get any more American than that,”
reckons Ms Dorsainvil. 7

42 United States

The Economist March 26th 2016

Lexington

The meaning of blue jeans

Denim’s history suggests that American attitudes to work are more complex than they seem

The popularity of clothing invented to survive hard labour is
of topical interest in America, a country gripped by election-year
debates about blue-collar, working-class voters, and whether
their interests have been ignored by ruling elites. Ms McClendon
argues, persuasively, that much of what Americans think they
know about denim draws on a set of “origin myths”, crafted and
disseminated by manufacturers over many years, both individ-
ually and in campaigns run by the Denim Council, an industry
group of clothing-makers and textile mills that was active from
1955-75. The council, whose papers are now in the FIT’s archives,
was formed after jeans-clad motorcycle gangs and such ﬁlms as
“The Wild One” and “Rebel Without a Cause” led to something
like a nationwide panic about denim and its unseemly eﬀects on
young bodies and minds. Committees of denim manufacturers
and advertising executives set out to combat “anxieties over juve-
nile delinquency”. Wholesome ﬁlms about jeans appeared on
over 70 television stations, and “How It All Began” cartoons ran
in newspapers, tracing the origins of denim back to medieval Eu-
rope. From the late 1950s Levi Strauss & Co. ran advertisements
and a letter-writing campaign urging schools to allow students to
attend classes in denim. Their pitch combined images of clean-
cut, studious children in jeans with such slogans as “Right for
School”, explains Tracey Panek, Levi’s company historian.
Quite a lot of this marketing was hokum, or close to it. There is
no evidence that Columbus crossed oceans under billowing den-
im sails, while the latest research is that the term “denim” may
have been invented in England. Perhaps most strikingly, relative-
ly few cowboys wore blue jeans at the height of the Wild West,
Ms McClendon says: canvas and leather trousers were also com-
mon. Denim was mostly worn by small farmers, ﬁeld-hands, la-
bourers and miners—some of the oldest pieces in the archives of
Levi Strauss & Co. were found in disused mines in California and
Nevada (there is a whole world of denim-hunters out there, will-
ing to endure much hardship to ﬁnd a pair of 1880s Levi’s).

The best history money can buy
Ms McClendon describes economic and commercial forces at
work in the 1930s. Denim sales to working-class customers
slumped during the Depression. At the same time ranchers in
need of extra income touted their properties as “dude ranches” at
which aﬄuent tourists could play at cowboys, apeing favourite
ﬁlm stars. Even Depression-era protectionism arguably played a
role: Sandra Comstock, a sociologist at Reed College in Oregon,
has written that tariﬀs on imported French clothing prodded de-
partment stores to promote domestic fashions including jeans.
Myth-making about jeans suggests a political conclusion, too:
that for a supposedly classless country America takes a compli-
cated view of work. Study denim’s history and it is hard to avoid
concluding that heroic individuals roaming the land, such as
cowboys, are easier to sell as fashion icons than folk who toil by
the hour in a factory, garage or ﬁeld, taking orders from a boss. The
ﬁrst gallery at the FIT exhibition shows how the earliest denim
clothes were often uniforms: it includes a prison uniform, sailor’s
overalls and, most tellingly, the sort of blue work-shirt made of
chambray (a cousin of denim) that inspired the term “blue-collar
worker” back in the 1920s. Yet, other than to a few urban hipsters
in recent decades, chambray shirts have mostly lacked the “cross-
over cool” of denim jeans, says Fred Dennis, senior curator at the
FIT—they did not ﬁt into a “romanticised, cool-dude weekend
look”. Small wonder that blue-collar workers feel forgotten. 7

IN AN interview near the end of his career the fashion designer
Yves Saint Laurent confessed to a regret: that he had not invent-
ed blue jeans. “They have expression, modesty, sex appeal, sim-
plicity,” sighed the owlish Frenchman. “All I hope for in my
clothes.” American denim-lovers might add other attributes. As
far back as the 1930s, when the popularity of cowboy ﬁlms
helped jeans make the leap from workwear into the wardrobes
of Hollywood stars, denim has been understood to stand for
something larger about the American spirit: for rugged individ-
ualism, informality and a classless respect for hard work.
“Deep down in every American’s breast…is a longing for the
frontier,” enthused Vogue magazine in 1935, advising readers on
how to dress with true “Western chic” (combine jeans with a Stet-
son hat and “a great free air of Bravado,” it counselled). Levi
Strauss & Co., the San Francisco ﬁrm which invented modern
blue jeans in 1873, saw sales boom after it crafted posters showing
denim-clad cowboys toting saddles and kissing cowgirls.
Jump to the 1950s and 1960s, and American consumers
learned the heroic history of denim from nationwide magazine
and television advertising campaigns. They were told that the
tough blue cloth began life as “Serge de Nîmes”, in the French
town of that name, and was used by Columbus for his ships’ sails,
before outﬁtting the pioneers who tamed the West. In a country
so often riven by culture wars, jeans crossed lines of ideology,
class, gender and race. Presidents from Jimmy Carter onwards
have worn denim when ﬁshing, clearing brush or playing sports
to signal their everyman credentials—though Barack Obama has
endured mockery for donning capacious jeans that he later con-
ceded were “a little frumpy”.
Since the second world war, when GIs and sailors took blue
jeans to the Old World and Asia, denim has carried ideas of
American liberty around the globe, often leaving governments
scrambling to catch up. Emma McClendon, a curator at the Fash-
ion Institute of Technology (FIT) in New York, notes in a ﬁne new
book, “Denim: Fashion’s Frontier”, that when the Berlin Wall
came down in 1989, reporters were surprised to see young East
Berliners dressed exactly like their cousins from the West—in
stonewashed jeans. Ms McClendon’s book accompanies a small
but splendid exhibition on denim at the FIT on Seventh Avenue.

S P E C I A L R E P O R T

T E C H N O L O G Y A N D P O L I T I C S

March 26th 2016

The signal 
and the 
noise

S P E C I A L R E P O R T

T E C H N O L O G Y A N D P O L I T I C S

The signal and the noise

Ever easier communications and ever-growing data mountains are
transforming politics in unexpected ways, says Ludwig Siegele.
What will that do to democracy?

DONALD TRUMP, THE Republican front-runner for the American presi-
dency, is clearly riding a wave of anger—but he is also wielding a huge vir-
tual megaphone to spread his populist messages. “@realDonaldTrump”,
the Twitter account of the property magnate turned politician, has more
than 7m followers and the number is rising by about 50,000 every day.
Moreover, since each of his tweets is re-tweeted thousands of times and
often quoted in mainstream media, his real audience is much bigger. And
if he does win the Republican nomination, it will be hard to tune him out.
“How do you ﬁght millions of dollars of fraudulent commercials pushing
for crooked politicians?” he tweeted in early March. “I will be using Face-
book & Twitter. Watch!”
If Ted Cruz, his fellow Republican, were to clinch the nomination,
the campaign for America’s presidency would be quieter—but no less
digital. Mr Cruz’s victory in the Iowa primaries was based on eﬀective
number-crunching. He bombard-
ed potential
supporters with
highly targeted ads on Facebook,
and used algorithms to label vot-
ers as “stoic traditionalists”, “tem-
peramental
conservatives” or
“true believers” to give campaign
volunteers something to go on.
He also sent oﬃcial-looking
“shaming” letters to potential
supporters who had previously
abstained from voting. Under the
headline “Voting Violation”, the
letters reminded recipients of
their failure to do their civic duty
at the polls and compared their
voting records with those of their
neighbours.
The way these candidates
are ﬁghting their campaigns, each
in his own way, is proof that poli-
tics as usual is no longer an op-
tion. The internet and the avail-
ability of huge piles of data on
everyone and everything are transforming the democratic process, just
as they are upending many industries. They are becoming a force in all
kinds of things, from running election campaigns and organising protest
movements to improving public policy and the delivery of services. This
special report will argue that, as a result, the relationship between citi-
zens and those who govern them is changing fundamentally.
Incongruous though it may seem, the forces that are now powering
the campaign of Mr Trump—as well as that of Bernie Sanders, the sur-
prise candidate on the Democratic side (Hillary Clinton is less of a suc-
cess online)—were ﬁrst seen in full cry during the Arab spring in 2011. The
revolution in Egypt and other Arab countries was not instigated by Twit-
ter, Facebook and other social-media services, but they certainly helped it
gain momentum. “The internet is an intensiﬁer,” says Marc Lynch of
George Washington University, a noted scholar of the protest move-
ments in the region.
In the course of just a few years digital technology has become an
essential ingredient in any protest movement. The Arab spring is just one 

On the cover
The cover of this special repor t is par t
of a visualisation of the Twitter
network of Amer ica’s anti-vaccina-
tion movement, developed by Gilad
Lotan of betaworks, a star tup
incubator. The circles represent
Twitter accounts and their size their
author ity within the network. The
lines between them mean they follow
each other. Diﬀerent colours mark
neighbourhoods of people who have
strong connections and share similar
messages. 

A C K N O W L E D G M E N T S

The author would like to acknowl-
edge the generous help he received
from many people while prepar ing
this repor t. Apar t from those
mentioned in the text, par ticular
thanks go to Ayad Al-Ani, Nick
Beauchamp, Dan Breznitz, Robyn
Caplan, Matthew Claudel, Ronald
Deiber t, Bruce Ettling, Rob Far is,
Alessandro Flammini, Deen Freelon,
King-wa Fu, Wael Ghonim, Er in Hill,
John Kelly, Julia Lane, Lawrence
Lessig, Matt Lira, Carl Miller, Charles
Mok, Beth Noveck, Andrew Rasiej,
Ben Rattray, Hal Rober ts, Michael
Schwemmle, Micah Sifr y, Nick Sinai,
Janice Stein, Josh Tucker, Milan de
Vr ies, Alber t Wenger, Ir ving Wladaw-
sky-Berger, Nicole Wong, Taha
Yasser i and Ethan Zuckerman.

A list of sources is at
Economist.com/specialreports

An audio inter view with 
the author is at
Economist.com/audiovideo/
specialreports

1

3

C O N T E N T S

4 Election campaigns
Politics by numbers

6 Tracking protest
movements
A new kind of weather

7 Online collaboration
Connective action

9 Local government
How cities score

11 Living with technology
The data republic

The Economist March 26th 2016

S P E C I A L R E P O R T

T E C H N O L O G Y A N D P O L I T I C S

Strong feelings

Prediction of turnout and strength of par ty suppor t

In 2010 elections

0

90,000+
Number of voters
per square

e

t

o
v
o

t

l

y
e
k

i
l

t

s

a
e
L

e

t

o
v
o

t

e

r

o
c
s

y

t
i

s

n

e
p
o

r

p

t

u
o
n

r

u

T

l

y
e
k

i
l

t

s

o

M

Most Republican

Source: Catalist

Partisanship score

Most Democratic

2

example of how the internet has facilitated political mobilisa-
tion. Others include the civil unrest in Istanbul’s Taksim Gezi
Park, the Maidan protests in Ukraine and the Umbrella Move-
ment in Hong Kong, all in 2013 or 2014. In America the main in-
stances have been Occupy Wall Street in 2011 and more recently
Black Lives Matter, a campaign drawing attention to violence
against African-Americans. In Europe, Spain’s Indignados, an
anti-austerity coalition, in 2011 became the ﬁrst big protest move-
ment to make extensive use of social media. Even Islamic State
relies on its online propaganda and messaging apps, which al-
low the self-styled caliphate to recruit new ﬁghters and keep in
touch with those on the ground.
However, this special report will argue that, in the longer
term, online crusading and organising will turn out to matter less
to politics in the digital age than harnessing those ever-growing
piles of data. The internet and related technologies, such as
smartphones and cloud computing, make it cheap and easy not
only to communicate but also to collect, store and analyse im-
mense quantities of information. This is becoming ever more im-
portant in inﬂuencing political outcomes.
America’s elections are a case in point. Mr Cruz with his
data savvy is merely following in the footsteps of Barack Obama,
who won his ﬁrst presidential term with the clever application
of digital know-how. Campaigners are hoovering up more and
more digital information about every voting-age citizen and
stashing it away in enormous databases. With the aid of complex
algorithms, these data allow campaigners to decide, say, who
needs to be reminded to make the trip to the polling station and
who may be persuaded to vote for a particular candidate.

No hiding place

In the case of protest movements, the waves of collective
action leave a big digital footprint. Using ever more sophisticated
algorithms, governments can mine these data. That is changing
the balance of power. In the event of another Arab spring, auto-
crats would not be caught oﬀ guard again because they are now
able to monitor protests and intervene when they consider it
necessary. They can also identify and neutralise the most inﬂu-
ential activists. Governments that were digitally blind when the
internet ﬁrst took oﬀ in the mid-1990s now have both a telescope
and a microscope.
But data are not just changing campaigns and political
movements; they aﬀect how policy is made and public services
are oﬀered. This is most visible at local-government level. Cities

have begun to use them for everything from smoothing traﬃc
ﬂows to identifying ﬁre hazards. Having all this information at
their ﬁngertips is bound to change the way these bureaucracies
work, and how they interact with citizens. This will not only
make cities more eﬃcient, but provide them with data and tools
that could help them involve their citizens more.
This report will look at electoral campaigns, protest move-
ments and local government in turn. Readers will note that most
of the examples quoted are American and that most of the peo-
ple quoted are academics. That is because the study of the inter-
relationship between data and politics is relatively new and
most developed in America. But it is beginning to spill out from
the ivory towers, and is gradually spreading to other countries.
The growing role of technology in politics raises many
questions. How much of a diﬀerence, for instance, do digitally
enabled protest surges really make? Many seem to emerge from
nowhere, then crash almost as suddenly, defeated by hard politi-
cal realities and entrenched institutions. The Arab spring upris-
ing in Egypt is one example. Once the incumbent president,
Hosni Mubarak, was toppled, the coalition that brought him
down fell apart, leaving the stage to the old powers, ﬁrst the Mus-
lim Brotherhood and then the armed forces.
In party politics, some worry that the digital targeting of
voters might end up reducing the democratic process to a market-
ing exercise. Ever more data and better algorithms, they fret,
could lead politicians to ignore those unlikely to vote for them.
And in cities it is not clear that more data will ensure that citizens
become more engaged.
When the internet ﬁrst took oﬀ, the hope was that it would
make the world a more democratic place. The fear now is that the
avalanche of digital information might push things the other
way. Viktor Mayer-Schönberger, a data expert at the University
of Oxford, sums up the problem: “Data are mainly helping those
who already have information power.” 7

Election campaigns

Politics by numbers

Voters in Amer ica, and increasingly elsewhere too,
are being ever more precisely targeted

WHEN TOM PITFIELD talks about the campaign of Justin
Trudeau, who was recently elected Canada’s prime minis-
ter, he gets animated. Mr Trudeau’s Liberal Party could not aﬀord
a lot of television time and spent much of its advertising budget
on social media. That proved an inspired choice. “We would
create an ad, see how people reacted to it on Facebook, tweak the
content and test it again. On some days we would produce more
than 50 diﬀerent ads,” explains Mr Pitﬁeld, who was in charge of
the campaign’s digital side. This rapid feedback, he says, allowed
his team to oﬀer much more ﬂexible and targeted messages than
the competition.
Although the trend is obscured by Donald Trump’s tweets
and his other antics, Facebook will also play a big role in Ameri-
ca’s presidential contest this year. The tools that the world’s big-
gest social network oﬀers to campaigners are getting better all
the time. Last year it provided a way to upload lists of people to
its site so they could be sent targeted messages. Now it is oﬀering
a further service that allows campaigners to reach Facebook us-
ers who “like” and share a lot of political content.

1

4

The Economist March 26th 2016

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S P E C I A L R E P O R T

T E C H N O L O G Y A N D P O L I T I C S

The starting-point for all this infor-
mation-gathering was the controversial
Florida recount after the presidential elec-
tion of 2000, which became necessary
partly because of incomplete voter rolls.
To avoid a repeat, Congress in 2002
passed the Help America Vote Act
(HAVA), which required states to main-
tain a “single, uniform, oﬃcial, central-
ised, interactive computerised statewide
voter registration list”. This was a bigger
deal than it appeared at ﬁrst sight. Along
with improvements in database technol-
ogies, HAVA made it possible for the ﬁrst
time for political parties to compile an up-
to-date list of all voters in the country. In
his book, “Hacking the Electorate”, Eitan
Hersh of Yale University argues that this
laid the groundwork for individual target-
ing. Campaigners were able to identify
voters easily and link them to other public
information.
The legislation also kicked oﬀ what
might be called “database politics”.
Democrats were the pioneers: in 2006
party oﬃcials set up a company called Ca-
talist which today oﬀers one of the most comprehensive data-
bases on Americans of voting age, covering more than 240m
people. Apart from the oﬃcial register of voters, it also includes
other public records and information from commercial data bro-
kers. Each entry contains hundreds of pieces of information,
from race to the probability of owning an SUV.
Catalist is best understood as a “data co-operative” for
Democratic campaigns, trade unions and other left-wing organi-
sations, says Laura Quinn, its chief executive. For a fee, it gives cli-
ents access to its common data pool. They can combine it with
their own information and beneﬁt from the ﬁrm’s analytics ex-
pertise, which mainly comes in the form of statistical “scores”.
These numbers predict, for instance, how likely someone is to
vote Democrat and go to the polls (see chart, previous page).
But the Democratic Party did not want to rely on an outside
database. When Mr Obama became president, it decided to
create its own. Called VoteBuilder, it also relies on the principle
of sharing data. During the primaries all competing Democratic
campaigns can use VoteBuilder and combine it with data they
gather on the trail. Much of that additional information is kept
separate, but campaigns share basic items such as name changes
or deaths. Once a nominee has been chosen for the general elec-
tion, a lot of these data become part of the common pool.
The Republicans’ central database, Voter Vault, has com-
manded less co-operation and has often been neglected be-
tween campaigns. Warring factions have insisted on producing
their own databases, often working with commercial vendors.
After Mr Romney lost to Mr Obama in 2012, Charles and David
Koch, billionaire brothers with a passion for conservative causes,
invested millions in i360, a for-proﬁt ﬁrm that competes with
Voter Vault. On both sides, access to all these databases can be a
highly political issue. Insurgent Democratic candidates in state
and local races frequently complain that they are being excluded;
they need to show a minimum of co-operation to get the data. 
Thanks to all this data-gathering, campaigners now seem to
“know you better than you know yourself”, as CNN, an Ameri-
can cable news channel, once put it. But the reality is diﬀerent, ex-
plains Mr Hersh in his book. A lot of the available data, particu-
larly the commercial sort, are of little value in helping 

1

5

Trumping the enemy

2

Even Barack Obama’s ﬁrst presidential campaign in 2008
was widely hailed as “data-driven”. But it was only in 2012 that
his team systematically used digital technology to deal with ev-
ery campaign’s biggest challenge: how to make the best use of a
limited budget to reach the right voters. In the past, geography
had served as a proxy target: if a precinct was considered Demo-
cratic, for instance, it would get a lot of attention from Democrat-
ic campaigners. But in recent years it has become possible to tar-
get voters individually, thanks to the availability of ever more
data as well as ever cheaper computing power and better meth-
ods to mine them.
To ﬁnd out where to concentrate its resources, the Obama
campaign used polls and other data to generate a statistical mod-
el of the attributes potential Obama supporters had in common.
“When volunteers knocked on doors in 2008, four out of ten peo-
ple they met backed Obama. In 2012 the ratio was nine out of
ten,” says Dan Wagner, who led the president’s data-science
team during his second campaign.

Hidden persuaders

From a windowless oﬃce in Chicago that became known
as the “data cave”, Mr Wagner and his colleagues also pioneered
a number of other methods of persuasion in that election. They
tested the subject lines of fundraising e-mails (“I will be out-
spent” raised $2.6m; “Do this for Michelle” only about
$700,000). They found out whether a group of voters they want-
ed to target watched certain cable shows, which allowed them to
use television advertising more cost-eﬀectively. Beyond mobilis-
ing their own voters, they also tried to identify others who might
be persuaded to change their mind (with limited success). 
Such novel approaches helped scupper the campaign of
Mitt Romney, the Republican candidate last time round. At the
time the Democrats were widely expected to retain a lasting edge
in data, not least because they ﬁnd it easier than the Republicans
to attract highly trained data scientists. But that turned out to be
wishful thinking. “Most of what we did in 2012 is now a com-
modity,” says Mr Wagner, who went on to found Civis Analytics,
a startup which oﬀers data-management and analytics services
to left-leaning groups.

The Economist March 26th 2016

S P E C I A L R E P O R T

T E C H N O L O G Y A N D P O L I T I C S

2

campaigners decide which voters to target. The best guide is the
basic demographic information taken from public records, such
as gender, age, voting history and party aﬃliation.
According to Mr Hersh, this explains why most lawmakers
are in favour of allowing easy access to public records. In 2012 a
legislator in Utah proposed giving voters the option of limiting
access to their date of birth, but the idea was quashed by the lead-
ership of both parties. Campaigners also ﬁle lots of requests
based on the Freedom of Information Act and state statutes that
govern public access to administrative data. “Ironically, laws os-
tensibly passed to help private citizens track the government’s
action turn out to be laws that help political campaigns track
private citizens,” writes Mr Hersh. But his main complaint is the
conﬂict of interest arising when parties control the sources of
data which they themselves use extensively. 
The big question is whether the use of such databases and
the algorithms that sift through them change the outcome of
elections. Recent estimates suggest that they can add between
two and three percentage points to a candidate’s result. In a
closely fought election that could be crucial, but in an emotional-
ly charged race between Mr Trump and Mrs Clinton it may not
play a decisive role. Then again, Mrs Clinton will probably end
up relying on technology more than she has done so far. The
Democrats, explains Matt Hindman of George Washington Uni-
versity, always have a harder time getting their supporters out to
vote than the Republicans do. Since Mrs Clinton has not enjoyed
universal enthusiasm for her candidacy, getting out the voters in
November may be even more diﬃcult than usual.
Besides, even if parties do not derive a lasting and decisive
advantage from data and analytics, they will still be obliged to in-
vest in technology to keep up with their competitors. And al-
though social media give politicians direct access to their voters,
as the Trump campaign shows, big parties still enjoy an advan-
tage because they have the money to hire technical talent, pay for
polls and buy advertising on Facebook.

Shr inking the public sphere

More broadly, some people worry about how all this num-
ber-crunching will aﬀect democracy, in America and elsewhere.
Mr Hersh does not see much of a problem, as long as data are
used just to get people out to vote, rather than to try to make them
change their mind. But Zeynep Tufekci of the University of North
Carolina argues that targeting voters with ever more personal-
ised messages will shrink the “public sphere”, which Jürgen Ha-
bermas, a German philosopher, once deﬁned as the basis of de-
mocracy. “This form of big-data-enabled computational politics
is a private one. At its core, it is opposed to the idea of a civic space
functioning as a public, shared commons,” writes Ms Tufekci.
And privacy is a growing concern. In December a database con-
taining the records of 191m voters found its way onto the internet. 
Rasmus Kleis Nielsen of Oxford University, who has writ-
ten a book on political campaigns in America, thinks that such
targeting will remain largely conﬁned to that country. Nowhere
else have party organisations access to so much money, data and
technical talent. Moreover, America’s political system lends it-
self well to analytics because once voters get to the polling sta-
tion they often have only two options. 
Yet there are signs that some other countries are shifting in
America’s direction. Apart from buying lots of ads on Facebook,
Canada’s Liberal Party in last year’s election used the services of
Civis Analytics, a ﬁrm spun oﬀ from the Obama campaign in
2012. In Britain, too, targeted ads on Facebook helped the Conser-
vative Party win the general election last May. And when it
comes to using social media to inﬂuence the political weather
more generally, America is by no means alone. 7

Tracking protest movements

A new kind of weather

Social media now play a key role in collective action 

WHEN BRITAIN’S MOST active followers of Islamic State
(IS) sent tweets and posted on Facebook, they did not ex-
pect all their online output to end up in print on a wall at the In-
ternational Centre for the Study of Radicalisation at King’s Col-
lege London. “Allah gave you this life, so use it the way he
commanded you to,” writes one. “Whenever pain comes to me I
just stop and think, ‘Allah does not give me more than I can bear.’
Then I carry on,” says another. 
The unusual display is an important part of a research pro-
ject to ﬁnd out if British IS followers who left for Syria use social
media diﬀerently from those who stayed at home. Shiraz Maher,
the project’s leader, and his colleagues took months to classify
each of the 50,000-odd messages and posts under headings such
as “yearning for the afterlife”, “religiosity” and “desire to mi-
grate”. “If we can ﬁnd patterns, we can perhaps predict when
somebody is about to go,” says Mr Maher.
The research illustrates a basic dilemma for movements
that live at least partly online: without the internet and social
media some of them would not exist, but the technology also
opens them up to an unprecedented degree of scrutiny. And the
tools for laying them bare are getting ever better.
Gilad Lotan, the chief data scientist at betaworks, an incu-
bator for startups in New York, did his military service in the in-
telligence corps of the Israeli army, where he was trained to dig
up information. He was pleasantly surprised when one day the
data just started arriving without any eﬀort on his part—on Twit-
ter. The micro-blogging service was an important communica-
tion channel for activists of Iran’s Green Movement in 2009 be-
fore it was blocked by the government in Tehran. 
Mr Lotan’s fascination with the data generated by social
movements has grown further as the tools to analyse them have
improved. “Topic modelling” reveals what people are talking
about; “sentiment analysis” gives an idea of how they feel; “net-
work mapping” identiﬁes the most important “nodes”; “visuali-

1

This is so sudden

Cumulative percentage of messages on social media
#MikeBrown
#BlackLivesMatter

#Er icGarner

Facebook
Twitter

2014

2015

#Ferguson

100

75

50

20

0

100

75

50

25

0

100

75

50

25

0

2014

2015

2014

2015

#HandsUpDontShoot
100

#ICantBreath(e)

75

50

25

0

100

75

50

25

0

100

75

50

25

0

2014

2015

2014

2015

2014

2015

Source: “Political Turbulence: How Social Media Shape Collective Action”, by T. Yasseri et al

6

The Economist March 26th 2016

S P E C I A L R E P O R T

T E C H N O L O G Y A N D P O L I T I C S

Movement in Iran pointed out that many if not most tweets were
in English and sent by people outside the country. But during the
Maidan protests most messages were in Ukrainian or Russian,
say researchers at New York University’s Social Media and Politi-
cal Participation (SMaPP) programme.
Similarly, to ﬁnd out how Hong Kong’s Umbrella Move-
ment evolved, a team at Hong Kong University looked at its pub-
lic Facebook pages. For every day when protesters occupied sev-
eral public spaces in the city in the second half of 2014, they
measured how interlinked the pages were. This number turned
out to be a good predictor of the mood in the population at large.
In a widely cited article in the New Yorker in 2010, Malcolm
Gladwell, a bestselling author, argued that the form of protests
promoted by social media, such as signing online petitions,
would never have the same impact as “high-risk” actions such as
those taken at the time of America’s civil-rights movements. But
online “slacktivism”, as other critics have called it (combining
the words “slacker” and “activism”), can make a diﬀerence. Look-

2

sation” software turns the information into colourful pictures.
And using such programs is becoming cheaper all the time.
Last year Mr Lotan turned his attention to the anti-vaccina-
tion movement in California, which relies heavily on social me-
dia to spread its message. Analysing the hashtags—increasingly
used as the brands of social movements, as in #BlackLivesMat-
ter—he found that most anti-vaccination messages came from
only a dozen Twitter accounts. After losing a legislative battle, the
movement’s leaders changed their message: rather than making
dubious claims about the link between vaccines and autism,
many accounts started to present vaccina-
tion as a matter of freedom to choose (see
the visualisation on the cover of this spe-
cial report, where the dark blue cluster on
top represents messages of that sort).
Mr Lotan is about to turn his hobby
into a product. Other ﬁrms already pro-
duce such network maps for money. One
is Graphika in New York. Its speciality is
identifying communities of interest with-
in social networks, ﬁnding the most inﬂu-
ential members and tracking what they
are talking about. Most of the ﬁrm’s cus-
tomers are companies such as fashion
brands or media ﬁrms, but it also looks at political issues. Its soft-
ware revealed, for instance, that during the Maidan protests in
Ukraine in 2013-14, Russian “spam bots”—programs that automat-
ically send messages—had a much larger presence in Ukraine’s
Twittersphere than tweets by the Russian political opposition.
Such analyses have answered many of the questions asked
about collective action online. They show that social media play
a key role under any kind of regime. Sceptics about the Green

Politics in the age of social media is better descr ibed by
chaos theor y than by conventional social science

ing at the tweets of several recent protest movements, including
the Indignados in Spain and the demonstrators at Istanbul’s Tak-
sim Gezi Park, researchers at SMaPP concluded that participants
at their periphery were as important as the ones at the centre.
Last but not least, social media can isolate people from
viewpoints they disagree with. Eli Pariser, an internet activist,
calls this the “ﬁlter bubble”. Researchers at Indiana University’s
Network Science Institute who analysed links shared on Twitter

1

Connective action

How the internet changes the way people club together

IT IS MORE than half a century old, but Man-
cur Olson’s book, “The Logic of Collective
Action”, is still hugely inﬂuential. In a nut-
shell, the late economist argued that large
groups of people will organise only if they
have some par ticular incentive: many will
simply “free-r ide” on the eﬀor ts of others.
Are the rules diﬀerent online?
In recent years a number of academics
have tr ied to ﬁnd an answer. One prominent
attempt is a book called “The Logic of Con-
nective Action”, by Lance Bennett and Alex-
andra Segerberg. The authors contend that
when people express views online, they do
not need to be par t of a formal organisation.
By shar ing links or posting comments, they
are already engaging in political activity. But
this diﬀuse political energy has to be bundled
to become eﬀective, hence the impor tance of
rallying cr ies such as the Occupy movement’s
“We are the 99%”. 
Yochai Benkler, a law professor at
Harvard University and author of another
inﬂuential book, “The Wealth of Networks”,

makes a similar argument. Just as far-ﬂung
communities of volunteer programmers are
able to produce useful open-source sof tware,
he says, activists can fur ther their cause by
banding together online. The best example
for such political “peer production”, as he
calls it, was the successful campaign to stop
SOPA and PIPA, two controversial bills in
Amer ica aimed at strengthening intellectual-
proper ty r ights online. He and his collab-
orators tracked the websites of the organisa-
tions suppor ting the campaign and mapped
links between them at diﬀerent stages. They
found a network that was constantly evolv-
ing, with diﬀerent players taking the lead at
diﬀerent points. “They managed to get
things done in a decentralised way,” says Mr
Benkler. He concludes that such movements
have become a “new source of power” in
addition to conventional ones, such as old-
style media and political par ties.
Henry Farrell, of George Washington
University, and Cosma Shalizi, of Carnegie
Mellon University, are more interested in the

scope the internet might oﬀer for exper i-
ments to improve democratic structures.
These are not nearly as good as they could be,
they reckon in a paper entitled “Cognitive
Democracy”. The internet is full of exper i-
ments in collective decision-making. The
most successful ones can be found in open-
source sof tware and content-shar ing sites.
Their governance structures range from
benevolent dictatorship (as practised by
Linux, an operating system) to more decen-
tralised organisations (for example, Wikipe-
dia, an online encyclopedia). 
None of this refutes Olson’s basic
premise that people do not automatically
collaborate, even if they have a common
interest. But the internet makes such col-
laboration much easier. And in the online
world people take action for diﬀerent rea-
sons, argue the authors of another book,
“Political Turbulence”: income levels matter
less and personalities more. Extrover ts, for
instance, are attracted by the prospect that
whatever they do will be widely noticed.

The Economist March 26th 2016 

7

S P E C I A L R E P O R T

T E C H N O L O G Y A N D P O L I T I C S

2

and searches on AOL, a web portal, showed that the sites reached
from social media are much less diverse than those reached from
a search engine. Pablo Barberá, formerly of SMaPP and soon to
join the University of Southern California, who examined the
political Twitterspheres in America, Germany and Spain, found
they were indeed polarised, particularly in America. 

Random spikes

Some researchers have now moved on to building comput-
er models to test theories about the behaviour of online social
networks. The spread of information on social media is typically
“spiky”, with some posts suddenly becoming extremely popular
whereas others never take oﬀ, regardless of the topic. 
To track how misinformation travels online, Filippo
Menczer and his colleagues at Indiana University developed a
system that can simulate millions of users to reproduce the “spi-
kyness” of social media. Even if the “users” are programmed to
prefer worthy content, misinformation can go viral when it coin-
cides with information overload, which is common online.
“People just pass on stuﬀ without thinking,” notes Mr Menczer.
A new book entitled “Political Turbulence” gives a taste of
where such research might lead. The four authors, most of
whom work at the Oxford Internet Institute, come to an intrigu-
ing conclusion: social media are making democracies more “plu-
ralistic”, but not in the conventional sense of the word, involving
diverse but stable groups. Instead, the authors see the emergence
of a “chaotic pluralism”, in which mobilisations spring from the
bottom up, often reacting to events. Online mobilisation can de-
velop explosively and seemingly at random. Most online peti-
tions, the authors found, attract only a small number of signa-
tures, but the successful ones took oﬀ in the ﬁrst few days (see
chart earlier in this article). Success does not seem to depend on
the subject matter: similar ones often fare quite diﬀerently. 
Politics in the age of social media, the authors conclude, is
better described by chaos theory than by conventional social sci-
ence: “Tiny acts of political participation that take place via so-
cial media are the units of analysis, the equivalent of particles
and atoms in a natural system, manifesting themselves in politi-
cal turbulence.” One day, say the authors, it will be possible to
predict and trigger such surges, in the same way that meteorolo-
gists have become good at forecasting the weather.
But who will be the political meteorologists? The chances
are that it will not be researchers such as Mr Lotan or Mr Menczer.
Access to data is getting harder. Many followers of IS, for instance,

A force for good or ill

E-government provision, by government type, 2015

x
e
d
n

i

e
c

i

v

r

e
s

t

n

e

m

n

r

e
v
o
g

-

E

1.0

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

10

5

–

0

+

5

10

Autocratic

Political regime

Democratic

Source: World Bank

8

Umbrella power

have abandoned Twitter and now use encrypted messaging ser-
vices considered safer, such as Telegram or TextSecure. Social-
media services are also becoming less generous with their data,
both for privacy and commercial reasons. 
Only two groups of actors are sure to have good access to
social-media and other types of internet data. One is the online
giants, such as Facebook and Google, which know much more
about people than any oﬃcial agency does and hold all this in-
formation in one virtual place. It may not be in their commercial
interest to use that knowledge to inﬂuence political outcomes, as
some people fear, but they certainly have the wherewithal. In
2010 Facebook allowed James Fowler, a political scientist at the
University of California, San Diego, to test the service’s inﬂuence
on people deciding whether or not to vote in the elections for
Congress. About 61m users were presented with an “I voted” but-
ton and shown pictures of friends who had clicked on it. Two
smaller control groups received either no message or just a notice
about the elections and how many users had clicked the “I vot-
ed” button. The results showed that the Facebook users who had
seen pictures of their friends were 0.4% more likely to vote than
those who had not.
The other group of actors are governments, particularly the
authoritarian kind. Having been caught oﬀ guard by online prot-
est movements, many are now investing heavily in their web-
based propaganda infrastructure. Russian government agencies,
for instance, are not just good at setting up social-media bots and
other spamming weapons to drown out genuine online dis-

1

The Economist March 26th 2016

 
 
S P E C I A L R E P O R T

T E C H N O L O G Y A N D P O L I T I C S

Local government

How cities score

Better use of data could make cities more

eﬃcient—and more democratic

MARTIN WALSH, THE mayor of Boston, keeps on top of
what is going on in his city. His oﬃce is dominated by a
dashboard, a large screen packed with constantly changing snip-
pets of text, numbers and charts (pictured, next page). One sec-
tion shows the current traﬃc to the city’s call centre and the per-
centage that has been answered within 30 seconds. Next to it is a
chart tracking the number of potholes ﬁlled every day, which
makes way for a map of Boston’s neighbourhoods coloured ac-
cording to how often Mr Walsh has visited them. 
But the central piece of information is the “CityScore”, a sin-
gle number to indicate Boston’s overall health. It combines 24 dif-
ferent metrics, from crime to Wi-Fi availability, energy consump-
tion and grants for the arts. A value above 1 means that things are
going better than planned; anything below this, and the mayor is
likely to pick up the phone. “Everybody knows that he is looking
at this,” says Daniel Koh, Mr Walsh’s chief of staﬀ, who came up
with the idea for the index. Bostonians can check it online.
CityScore, launched last October, reﬂects a growing trend
among city governments in America. Led by Boston, Chicago
and New York, they have started to use the ever-increasing
amounts of data they collect to improve planning, oﬀer better
services and engage citizens. To speed up the process, the White
House recently launched a new “smart-city” initiative.
Here we go again, you might say: it was only a few years ago
that big makers of computing and communications gear made
an eﬀort to persuade city halls to buy more of their machines.
But this time the push is coming more from the city governments
and even the citizens themselves. Cities are becoming aware that
data, and the infrastructure to analyse them, will eventually be-
come as important to their citizens’ welfare as the power grid
and the transport system. 
What most mayors have yet to realise, however, is how
much their administrations will have to change to be able to get
the best out of these data—and use them to make their cities
more democratic. More and better data could help governments
ensure that services in poor neighbourhoods are as good as
those in rich ones. Given a city-wide system of sensors, the lead-
contaminated water that poisoned poor citizens of Flint, Michi-
gan, in 2014-15 would probably have been spotted much earlier.

Pinpointing potholes

In some ways Boston has been a digital pioneer. In 2006 the
previous mayor, Tom Menino, hired the city’s ﬁrst cabinet-level
chief information oﬃcer. He was behind the launch of an app
called “Citizen Connect” which made it easy for people to report
problems, for instance by taking a picture of graﬃti. Another ﬁrst
was the creation of an internal innovation team, perhaps best
known for another app, Street Bump. This collects vibration data
from moving cars to pinpoint potholes that need to be ﬁlled.
Now the city is putting more eﬀort into learning from such
data. About one-third of its rubbish bins are equipped with solar
panels and sensors that signal when a bin is full, making rubbish
collection more eﬃcient. The city’s data scientists have also ana-
lysed online classiﬁed ads to identify landlords who cram too
many tenants into their ﬂats. And they are running experiments 

1

9

2

course. They also employ armies of “trolls” to ﬁght on their be-
half in Western comment sections and Twitter feeds. 
China’s political weathermen are even more sophisticated.
Researchers at Harvard University who studied millions of Chi-
nese social-media posts found that censors mostly blocked con-
tent designed to spur collective action but tended to tolerate
comments critical of the Chinese leadership. 
The longer-term worry is that the internet and related tech-
nologies could strengthen authoritarian governments and may
make it harder for the countries concerned to move towards de-
mocracy. In a recent report the World Bank pointed out that
among non-democratic countries, the most autocratic have in-
vested most in e-government services (see chart, previous page).
They do this, says the bank, to strengthen control and solve what
it calls the “dictator’s dilemma”: the invidious choice between re-
stricting the internet, which would hurt economic development,
and leaving it unfettered, which could undermine the govern-
ment’s power.
Similarly, in a recent paper Espen Geelmuyden Rod and
Nils Weidmann, both of the University of Konstanz, ﬁnd that the
internet tends to grow faster in countries in which regimes are
more concerned about the ﬂow of information. They also argue
that there is no evidence to date “that democracy advances in au-
tocracies that expand the internet”. 
At least in democratic countries, though, there are some en-
couraging signs that at the local level the internet has improved
participation in decision-making from the bottom up. 7

The Economist March 26th 2016

S P E C I A L R E P O R T

T E C H N O L O G Y A N D P O L I T I C S

2

known as “A/B-tests” that have already become routine online.
So far they have tried prioritising buses at traﬃc lights and in-
creasing ﬁnes for blocking an intersection, and then used data
from Waze, a popular navigation app owned by Google, to see
how this aﬀects congestion, a big problem in Boston.
MIT’s Senseable City Lab in Cambridge across the Charles
River gives a taste of how much more cities could do with data.
Researchers there are working on a cheap package of sensors to
be put on top of street lights, which if widely deployed would
make it possible to measure noise and pollution levels almost
house by house in real time. A project called “Underworlds” en-
visages small robots crawling through sewers, collecting sam-
ples and perhaps one day analysing them on the spot. This could
reveal things such as what people eat and how many have the
ﬂu. “Imagine how many data get ﬂushed down the toilet,” says
Erin Baumgartner, one of the lab’s directors. The project is sup-
ported by the government of Kuwait, which is looking for ways
to measure its people’s excessive intake of salt.
However, this sort of thing is not going to make much diﬀer-
ence if the bureaucratic structure of city governments remains
the same. Most are collections of depart-
mental silos that do not communicate
much with each other, held together by
complex hierarchies and rules. That may
have worked when information was
scarce and moved slowly, but now it has
become an obstacle. City governments
have to become more of a coherent whole—a “platform”, as
geeks put it.
This often starts with getting the technology right. City gov-
ernments’ computer systems tend to reﬂect their fragmented na-
ture. Information is typically kept in separate databases. Making
these work together is crucially important, but the task is often
underestimated, explains Jascha Franklin-Hodge, Boston’s chief
information oﬃcer. The city still has more work to do, but most
of its digital information now sits in a “data warehouse”, a big
computer system where it can be easily accessed and analysed.
The next thing is better integration of a city’s administra-
tion. To be able to improve existing services and develop new
ones, departments have to work together more closely, says Ste-

What the mayor saw

10

A project called “Underworlds” envisages small robots
crawling through sewers, collecting samples and
perhaps one day analysing them on the spot

phen Goldsmith of Harvard University and co-author of “The
Responsive City”, a new book about urban government. City
employees also have to be able to act more independently and
be judged by their results, not have to follow rules slavishly.
Regulation, too, has to be rethought. When information
about businesses was hard to come by, it made sense to impose
all kinds of rules and regularly check for compliance. But now
that analytics can point to likely violators, and business practices
can be tracked in real time, such regulation may amount to over-
kill. In Chicago inspectors were sent mainly to restaurants which
an algorithm had identiﬁed as potential problems.
Yet the biggest change will be of another order: cities need
to play a more active role as broker of urban data. This means
more than just sharing reams of their own administrative infor-
mation, as many cities around the world already do, says Antho-
ny Townsend, a researcher at New York University and author of
a book on smart cities. Municipal governments should become
the guardians of the local data ecosystem, creating a framework
that encourages others to share data and oﬀer services to citizens.
They could act, for instance, as a portal for information from util-

ities and online ﬁrms, while also protecting privacy and ensur-
ing that the algorithms used do not discriminate against particu-
lar groups of people.
Some cities are beginning to take on this role. An early ex-
ample is Boston’s data-sharing partnership with Waze on reduc-
ing traﬃc congestion. In return for some of the service’s data, the
city is giving it early warning of any planned road closures. Chi-
cago, meanwhile, has launched OpenGrid, a website which al-
lows citizens and businesses easily to visualise public urban data
using online maps.
In New York the Centre for Urban Science and Progress
(CUSP) has launched a project called “Quantiﬁed Communities”
to work out how people could use data generated by increasing
numbers of sensors in their neighbourhoods. One idea is to mea-
sure air quality in diﬀerent areas and compare it with hospitalisa-
tion rates for asthma. Constantine Kontokosta, who heads the
project at CUSP, explains that “we want to deﬁne the problem be-
fore we decide on the technology—not the other way around.” 
Seattle, for its part, has discovered that citizens will insist on
stringent protection of privacy. A few years ago it began using a
wireless police network that could track smartphones, along
with automatic licence-plate readers. The programme was im-
plemented without much public discussion or thought about
how the data would be managed. That led to a backlash from res-
idents and a hasty about-turn. The city has since adopted de-
tailed privacy principles and has just appointed a data-protec-
tion oﬃcer—a standard requirement in European cities but a ﬁrst
in America.
It is less clear what cities can and will do to prevent algo-
rithms from becoming “Weapons of Math Destruction”, the title
of a forthcoming book by Cathy O’Neil, a blogger and former
quantitative analyst on Wall Street. Critics allege that local police
forces in America are the worst oﬀenders. Their “predictive pol-
icing”, which uses algorithms, crime statistics and other data to
pinpoint “hotspots” where further crimes are likely to be com-
mitted, has sometimes proved quite accurate. But it can also lead
to unnecessary questioning, excessive stopping and searching
and racial proﬁling in such hotspots.

The Economist March 26th 2016

1

2

Even apparently neutral apps such as Street Bump may
have unintended consequences: the service could give priority
to wealthier neighbourhoods where people can aﬀord smart-
phones, leaving potholes in poor areas unﬁlled. To avoid such an
outcome, Boston ﬁrst released the app to its road inspectors, who
drive all over the city. It has also negotiated a deal with Uber, the
taxi-hailing service, to get trip data so that its transport depart-
ment can monitor, for instance, how long passengers in poor
neighbourhoods have to wait for a car.
The big political question is whether data will simply make
city government more eﬃcient—which in itself is a worthwhile
goal—or whether they will also empower citizens. Susan Craw-
ford of Harvard University, co-author of “The Responsive City”,
argues that having access to data will not only show people what
their tax money can achieve, but give them the tools to get in-
volved in their city’s aﬀairs. 
Others are not so sure. Technology rarely ﬁxes the underly-
ing problem but mostly replicates it, says Benjamin Barber, an
American political theorist with an interest in local government.
“Above all we need smart mayors and smart citizens, not smart
cities.” The dashboard in the mayor’s oﬃce suggests that in Bos-
ton, for now at least, eﬃciency and control win out. 7

Living with technology

The data republic

To safeguard democracy, the use of data should be
made as transparent as possible

“TECHNOLOGY IS NEITHER good nor bad; nor is it neu-
tral,” said the late Melvin Kranzberg, one of the most inﬂu-
ential historians of machinery. The same is true for the internet
and the use of data in politics: it is neither a blessing, nor is it evil,
yet it has an eﬀect. But which eﬀect? And what, if anything, needs
to be done about it?
Jürgen Habermas, the German philosopher who thought
up the concept of the “public sphere”, has always been in two
minds about the internet. Digital communication, he wrote a
few years ago, has unequivocal democratic merits only in au-
thoritarian countries, where it undermines the government’s in-
formation monopoly. Yet in liberal regimes, online media, with
their millions of forums for debate on a vast range of topics,
could lead to a “fragmentation of the public” and a “liquefaction
of politics”, which would be harmful to democracy.
The ups and downs of the presidential campaign in Ameri-
ca and the political turbulences elsewhere seem to support Mr

Piles of digital information and the algor ithms to
analyse them tend to be good for those in power

Habermas’s view. Indeed, it is tempting to ask whether all this
online activism is not wasted political energy that could be put to
better use in other ways. Indeed, the meteoric rise of many on-
line movements appears to explain their equally rapid demise:
many never had time to build robust organisations. 
But online activism cannot be dismissed. Some move-
ments have had real impact, either by putting an issue on the po-
litical agenda or by taking over an existing organisation. Without

The Economist March 26th 2016

S P E C I A L R E P O R T

T E C H N O L O G Y A N D P O L I T I C S

the Occupy movement, the debate about income inequality in
America would be much less prominent. The same goes for the
Black Lives Matter campaign and violence against African-Amer-
icans. In Britain, Jeremy Corbyn and his supporters managed to
commandeer the Labour Party. In America, Donald Trump
seems about to do the same with the Republican Party (though
whether he can do it to the whole country remains to be seen).

No going back

Only the most extreme critics want to go back to a time
when the ﬂow of information was controlled mostly by govern-
ments and mass media. And the current political turbulences
may lead to the creation of services that calm them down. Earlier
this year, for instance, Change.org, a petition site with nearly
140m members, launched Change Politics, which lets any user,
including media companies and other organisations, post en-
dorsements. The idea is that voters will be able to draw on re-
commendations by people they trust, rather than being manipu-
lated by political commercials and tweets.
The eﬀect of vast quantities of data is both easier and hard-
er to gauge. As this special report has shown, piles of digital infor-
mation and the algorithms to analyse them tend to be good for
those in power. Political parties with plenty of money can use
them both to target voters and to discipline recalcitrant candi-
dates by cutting oﬀ access. Autocratic governments that were
blindsided when the internet took oﬀ in the mid-1990s have re-
gained their vision. Data can make cities more eﬃcient, but also
more centralised and controlling.
All this suggests that data and analytics risk slowing down
and perhaps even undoing the welcome redistribution of power
to ordinary people that the internet seemed to be able to oﬀer.
They create “points of control” in what used to be largely an
“open system”, as Yochai Benkler of Harvard University puts it in
a recent article in Daedalus, an American journal. The design of
the original internet, he writes, was biased towards decentralisa-
tion of power and the freedom to act. Along with other develop-
ments such as smartphones and cloud computing, he now sees
data as a force for recentralisation that allows “the accumulation
of power by a relatively small set of inﬂuential state and non-
state actors”.
Does this matter? Another law of technology, particularly
the digital kind, is that it is never in equilibrium. Data can em-
power both empires and rebels. David
Karpf, of George Washington University,
expects a rise in what he calls “analytic ac-
tivism”, the title of a forthcoming book of
his. One example is MoveOn.org, a left-
wing advocacy group in America with a
voracious appetite for data of which even
many of its 8m members are unaware.
Among many other things, it closely
tracks whether people have read the
many messages it sends out.
Equally important, digital technol-
ogy has a “capacity to surprise”, says Hel-
en Margetts of the Oxford Internet Insti-
tute 
(OII). The database politicking
within America’s parties has created room for non-partisan of-
ferings. One is NationBuilder, a startup based in Los Angeles. Its
clients get access to a basic national voter ﬁle to which they can
add their own data and share it with other campaigns if they
wish. “Unlike an organisation which keeps a big central data-
base, we don’t have to make a decision on who can use it,” says
Jim Gilliam, the startup’s chief executive.
And then there is the blockchain. This technology, a version

1

11

S P E C I A L R E P O R T

T E C H N O L O G Y A N D P O L I T I C S

2 of which powers bitcoin, a cryptocurrency, could prove to be a
big democratic reset button. It is essentially a new type of data-
base that is owned and maintained not by a single actor but by its
users, who collectively agree to any changes. Such “distributed
ledgers”, as they are known, could one day become alternatives
to big centralised databases. Venture-capital ﬁrms have made
their ﬁrst bets on such undertakings, including OpenBazaar, a
peer-to-peer marketplace. Perhaps one day voter ﬁles will be
kept in blockchain-like distributed ledgers, which allow citizens
to reveal their data only to the candidates they like. 

Taming the beast

It would be foolish, however, to base public policy solely
on the hope that some new service or technology will come
along to solve existing problems. So what safeguards might be in-
troduced to limit the power conferred by data? The most radical
proposal comes from Evgeny Morozov, a technology critic. He
thinks that big companies such as Facebook and Google should
be barred from owning certain types of data, such as the key-
words users search for, and whether those users have voted in
the past. Instead, this information should belong to the individ-
uals concerned and shared only if they so choose. Yet the politi-
cal will to implement such a policy is lacking in much of the
world, says Mr Morozov. 
A more practical idea comes from Gavin Starks, the execu-
tive director of London’s Open Data Institute. He argues that cer-
tain types of data may need to be kept available to all: address
ﬁles and geospatial information, for instance, are akin to roads
and other public infrastructure and need to be treated in the
same way. “We need to discuss who owns our data infrastruc-
ture, what roles the public and private sectors should have, and
what role we as citizens play,” he recently wrote in a blog post.
Others think that more transparency would help. Zeynep
Tufekci of the University of North Carolina wants campaigners
to be required to publish all the messages they pitch to voters—in
the same way as they are obliged, at least in America, to show in
detail how they have spent their campaign money. And Eitan
Hersh of Yale University recommends that voters should be giv-

The internet, but not as you know it

12

Offer to readers

Repr ints of this special repor t are available. 
A minimum order of f ive copies is required.
Please contact: Jill Kaletha at Foster
Pr inting Tel: +1 866 879 9144 Ext: 168 
e-mail: jillk@fosterpr inting.com

Corporate orders of 100 copies or more are 
available. We also of fer a customisation 
ser vice. Please contact us to discuss your 
requirements.
Tel: +44 (0)20 7576 8148
e-mail: r ights@economist.com

For more information on how to order special 
repor ts, repr ints or any copyr ight quer ies 
you may have, please contact:

The Rights and Syndication Depar tment
20 Cabot Square
London E14 4QW
Tel: +44 (0)20 7576 8148
Fax: +44 (0)20 7576 8492
e-mail: r ights@economist.com
www.economist.com/r ights

Previous special repor ts and a list of
for thcoming ones can be found online: 
economist.com/specialreports

Corporate offer

Future special reports

Business in Afr ica Apr il 16th 
International banking May 7th
Migration May 14th
The Middle East May 28th

en the chance to check the infor-
mation held about them in cam-
paign databases.
Transparency over the use
of algorithms has its limits.
Opening them up for inspec-
tion, as some have proposed,
can make them lose their value
because it will allow them to be
gamed. Others are so complex
that even their authors do not
fully understand how they oper-
ate. One possibility is to develop
algorithms that check on algo-
rithms. Researchers at Colum-
bia University have built a soft-
ware tool called Sunlight
to
reveal why, say, users of online
services are presented with cer-
tain ads.
Luciano Floridi, also of the
OII, calls for an ethical frame-
work for the use of data, much
like that currently being devel-
oped for reproductive technol-
ogies. Some companies have al-
ready started to move in this
direction. Google has set up an
ethics committee for artiﬁcial in-
telligence. And the British par-
liament’s science and technol-
ogy committee recently pro-
posed the creation of a national data-ethics council.
The debate about data and politics has only just begun and
these proposals need time to mature. But getting the rules for
managing digital information right is critically important. Societ-
ies will have to decide how they want data to be used, in politics
as well as in other spheres. As Alec Ross, a former State Depart-
ment oﬃcial who now works as an advis-
er on technology politics for Hillary Clin-
ton’s campaign, puts it in his new book
“The Industries of the Future”: “The
choices we make about how we manage
data will be as important as the decisions
about managing land during the agricul-
tural age and managing industry during
the industrial age.”
Data and politics are likely to be-
come ever more intertwined, as science-
ﬁction writers have long forecast. They
may have got the details wrong, but some
of their ideas are nevertheless worth con-
sidering. Isaac Asimov, who died a quar-
ter of a century ago, before the internet
took oﬀ, invented a prophetic universe
ruled by a group of “psychohistorians”
who forecast humanity’s future, using a
set of complicated equations. To prevent
people from interfering with the predic-
tions, they had to keep them secret, but
that in turn created untold complications.
The story, like this special report, suggests
that technology is morally neutral. Data
are neither good nor bad for democracy. It
all depends on how people use them. 7

The Economist March 26th 2016

44

The Amer icas

The Economist March 26th 2016

Also in this section

45 Canada’s big-spending budget

45 An Amer ican invasion of Cuba

46 Bello: The drama of Lula

Brazil’s political cr isis

Tick tock

S Ã O P A U L O

Dilma Rousseﬀ’s chances of remaining in oﬃce are diminishing by the day
ON MARCH 18th the clock started tick-
ing for Dilma Rousseﬀ. The lower
house of Brazil’s Congress voted to start
the impeachment process against the pres-
ident, who has until early April to present
her defence. She faces charges of using ac-
counting trickery to hide the true size of the
budget deﬁcit. Her congressional foes plan
to put forward a second motion based on
allegations that relate more directly to the
main scandal that threatens her future: a
former ally claims that she tried to obstruct
a wide-ranging investigation into a multi-
billion-dollar bribery scheme at Petrobras,
the state-controlled oil giant, from which
her left-wing Workers’ Party (PT) proﬁted. 
As congressmen in Brasília, the capital,
cast their votes, 300,000-odd PT suppor-
ters swept onto the streets across the coun-
try in support of their embattled leader.
But before the crowds dispersed, the presi-
dent suﬀered another setback. The ap-
pointment as minister of her wily prede-
cessor, Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva, was
blocked by a supreme-court judge. 
Thus ended the most eventful and od-
dest 72 hours in recent Brazilian history.
They leave the president weakened, possi-
bly fatally. The reputation of her once-re-
vered predecessor is in tatters (see Bello).
That of the crusading judge leading the Pe-
trobras investigation, Sérgio Moro, has
been damaged, too. The country, which is
suﬀering its worst recession since the 1930s,
is angry and bewildered. 
The latest furore began on March 16th,

when Ms Rousseﬀ named Lula as her chief
of staﬀ—a position she once held under
him. She needed “a skilful political negoti-
ator” by her side, she explained, which is
no doubt true. But most Brazilians think
she hired Lula to give him the immunity
from prosecution in ordinary courts that
Brazilian law grants to members of cabinet.
Mr Moro is investigating whether he bene-
ﬁted from the shakedown of Petrobras,
which appears to have started while he
was president from 2003 to 2010. Earlier
this month police brieﬂy detained him for
questioning. Lula denies any wrongdoing. 
The anger of the government’s foes was
fuelled by a telephone conversation be-
tween the former and current presidents,
released by Mr Moro on March 16th. In it,
the president tells her mentor that she will
send a nomination letter for him to sign “if
necessary”, which many interpreted as
proof of a conspiracy to avoid justice. Anti-
government protests erupted in several cit-
ies; in Brasília the night sky was lit up with
burning tyres. The president’s oﬃce said
the conversation was merely a reference to
Lula’s possible absence from the swear-
ing-in ceremony the next day. He attended
the event, but was in oﬃce for a matter of
hours before Gilmar Mendes, a supreme-
court justice, suspended his appointment. 
The government is appealing against
Mr Mendes’s ruling to the full tribunal. Ms
Rousseﬀ’s allies have also vowed to seek
judicial redress against Mr Moro, who un-
sealed the wiretaps in “ﬂagrant violation

of the law and constitution”. Many law-
yers agree that he erred in releasing record-
ings in which one party—the president no
less—is not under formal investigation and
enjoys strong constitutional protection.
The controversial exchange was recorded
after Mr Moro had ordered the police to
stop tapping Lula’s phone. One supreme-
court justice chastised the judge for “leav-
ing the law by the wayside”.
In theory the weight of evidence
against Ms Rousseﬀ, who denies all wrong-
doing, will determine her fate in Congress.
In practice political passions will play a big
role. A poll published last weekend found
that 68% of Brazilians favour impeach-
ment. Fernando Henrique Cardoso, a for-
mer president who long believed that im-
peachment would set a dangerous
precedent, now supports it. “That is what
the streets clamour for,” he told a newspa-
per. A record 3.6m people marched earlier
this month to demand Ms Rousseﬀ’s fall. 

The passion of Dilma Rousseﬀ
On March 16th the Brazilian Republican
Party decided to leave Ms Rousseﬀ’s co-
alition—depriving her of 22 centrist votes.
The Progressive Party, with 55 legislators,
may do the same. More worrying for Ms
Rousseﬀ, her biggest coalition partner, the
Party of the Brazilian Democratic Move-
ment (PMDB), led by Brazil’s vice-presi-
dent, Michel Temer, may also leave. It is to
decide on March 29th. 
Several PMDB bigwigs have already de-
clared themselves in favour of impeach-
ment. Brasília is abuzz with talk of a Temer-
led government of national unity, which
would include Mr Cardoso’s centre-right
Party of Brazilian Social Democracy
(though not the former president himself).
When this week Mr Temer denied any ne-
gotiations on such an alliance were taking
place, few believed him. 
Ms Rousseﬀ’s chances of winning sup-

1

The Economist March 26th 2016

2 port from 172 of the 513 federal deputies—
the number needed to stop the lower
house from referring the impeachment
motion to the Senate for trial—are dimin-
ishing. The upper house, too, appears hos-
tile to the president. It is likely to accept for
consideration any impeachment motion
referred by the lower house, the chamber’s
Speaker, Renan Calheiros, reportedly said.
This could happen by mid-April. Ms Rous-
seﬀ would then have to leave oﬃce for up
to 180 days while the Senate deliberates.
Mr Temer would take over. If the Senate
impeaches her, Mr Temer would probably
govern until the after next election in 2018.
He would inherit a mess. GDP is expect-
ed to shrink by 4% in 2016 for the second
year running. Inﬂation of more than 10% is
reducing real wages. The unemployment
rate has nearly doubled since 2014 (though
it is still less than 10%). One in ﬁve young
Brazilians is without work; economists
warn of a “lost generation”. Brazil is no
Venezuela: some export-oriented indus-
tries are thriving thanks to the weak cur-
rency (see page 57). But for most companies
and workers the outlook is grim.
Conﬁdence will return only if the gov-
ernment reduces the budget deﬁcit. At
nearly 11% of GDP, it keeps interest rates
high and has pushed public debt to what
for Brazil is an unsustainable level, of 70%
of GDP. Ms Rousseﬀ’s proposals to cut
spending and raise taxes are stuck in Con-
gress—partly because her party opposes
them. If that does not change, the govern-
ment will miss this year’s unambitious tar-
get for a primary budget surplus (excluding
interest payments) of 0.5% of GDP. Samuel
Pessoa of IBRE-FGV, a think-tank, forecasts
a “recurring” primary deﬁcit (not counting
one-oﬀ revenues) of a record 2.5% of GDP. It
is time for politics to help the economy, the
largely powerless ﬁnance minister, Nelson
Barbosa, pleaded forlornly.
Financial markets are pinning their
hopes on a new government. If Mr Temer
takes over at the head of a national-unity
coalition, a stronger ﬁnance minister could
push through emergency measures, such
as a levy on ﬁnancial transactions, to re-
duce the budget deﬁcit. Share prices in São
Paulo have risen by 25% since late February
as odds of that happening have improved.
Most Brazilians do not share this enthu-
siasm. Just one in six thinks a government
led by Mr Temer would be any good. That
is understandable. Six PMDB congressmen
are being investigated in the Petrobras af-
fair, including Mr Calheiros and the lower-
house Speaker, Eduardo Cunha, whom the
supreme court indicted for corruption ear-
lier this month. Nearly 60% of Congress’s
594 members face criminal accusations,
from presenting dodgy electoral accounts
to homicide. Whether Ms Rousseﬀ stays or
goes they could remain in oﬃce until after
an election in 2018. The renewal Brazilians
yearn for is years away. 7

Canada’s budget

Globalisation with
a human face

O T T AW A

The new prime minister begins to make
his mark
JUSTIN TRUDEAU has been Canada’s
prime minister since November, but it
was only on March 22nd that he showed
the country in detail how he intends to
lead it. His government’s ﬁrst budget, pre-
sented by the ﬁnance minister, Bill Mor-
neau, broke decisively with the austerity
of the previous Conservative administra-
tion. Faced with an economy weakened by
low commodity prices, Mr Trudeau and
his ﬁnance minister had no hesitation in
keeping the lavish promises of extra
spending made by their Liberal Party dur-
ing the election campaign.
Federal spending is projected to rise
from 13.6% of GDP in the last ﬁscal year to
14.6% in 2016-17. The Liberals had promised
a big programme of spending on infra-
structure to repair the country’s creaking
transport systems and invest in green tech-
nology. Their ﬁrst budget wisely does this
by boosting maintenance spending on ex-
isting facilities while they ponder backing
bigger projects, perhaps including oil pipe-
lines and LNG facilities, later on. The deﬁcit
is set to rise this ﬁscal year to C$29.4 billion
($22.5
billion),
about
1.5%
of
GDP, from C$5.4 billion. Mr Trudeau
seems to have given up on his goal to bal-
ance the budget by 2019.
At a time when most rich-country gov-
ernments are squeezing their budgets Can-
ada’s can aﬀord to splurge, in part because
of the budget discipline practised by the
Conservatives. Canada’s public debt is
considerably lower than that of its peers
(see chart). The government is hoping that
the economy will strengthen with a looser
ﬁscal policy enhancing the stimulus of low
interest rates, rather than counteracting it
as it has done since 2012. 
Mr Trudeau scrapped the Conserva-
tives’ ﬁscal policy in part to preserve their
other achievements. He supports the Can-
ada-EU trade agreement negotiated by his
predecessor, Stephen Harper, and has
signed the Trans-Paciﬁc Partnership, a
trade accord among 12 Paciﬁc nations. The
Liberals have already kept their promise to
cut income tax for the middle class, and
pay for that with an increase for top earn-
ers. The budget does not raise corporate-
tax rates, which remain comparable with
those of Canada’s competitors. 
The aim seems to be to maintain Cana-
da’s commitment to globalisation, but to
give it a human face. With Donald Trump
whipping up resentment across the border
among Americans who feel left behind, Mr

The Amer icas 45

Trudeau’s trousseau

Net government debt as % of GDP

2014

Japan*

Italy

France

G7 average

Br itain

United States

Germany

Canada

Source: IMF

0

30

60

90

120

150

*Estimate

Trudeau is eager to keep anger and popu-
lism at bay. “A lot of what I worry about is
that ordinary folks are going to withdraw
their support for the growth economy,”
said Mr Trudeau to a business audience in
New York last week. The median income
of the middle class has not risen in 30
years, he noted. Conﬁdence in the econ-
omy is at its lowest point in 20 years, ac-
cording to a recent poll.
With total revenues of C$300 billion,
the federal government’s capacity to lift
the C$2 trillion economy is limited. The
budget’s impact will be modest, says Craig
Alexander of the C.D. Howe Institute, a
think-tank. Still, most economists support
deﬁcit spending at a time when borrowing
rates are low and the economy is weak.
The question is: will Mr Trudeau know
when to stop? 7

The United States and Cuba

An American
invasion

Barack Obama brings a message of
friendship and human rights
FOR more than half a century Fidel Cas-
tro ordered Cubans to be prepared to re-
sist an American invasion. When it ﬁnally
came this week it took the peaceful and
friendly form of President Barack Obama,
his wife and daughters, nearly 40 mem-
bers of Congress and some top business
leaders. Even so, many residents of Ha-
vana, Cuba’s capital, had to pinch them-
selves when they saw Air Force One ﬂy
over the city on March 20th and the
“Beast”, as Mr Obama’s armoured limou-
sine is dubbed, ply the streets. Cubans
turned out spontaneously to greet him.
Mr Obama’s visit could truly be called
historic. It set the seal on his dramatic
move to restore diplomatic relations with
the communist island and to loosen the
economic embargo imposed in 1960 after
Fidel Castro’s revolution. 

1

46 The Amer icas

The Economist March 26th 2016

2

In 48 hours of walkabouts, meetings
and speeches, the American president de-
livered the same message, politely and re-
spectfully, but ﬁrmly: that he had come to
“bury the last remnant of the cold war in
the Americas” and “to extend a hand of
friendship to the Cuban people” but also to
make plain that Cuba needs to change. 
Raúl Castro, Fidel’s brother and Cuba’s
president since 2008, treated Mr Obama
with warmth and stressed that both sides
should respect their diﬀerences. He also
called for the lifting of the embargo (only
the United States Congress can do that)
and for the return to Cuba of the naval base

at Guantánamo Bay.
Mr Obama’s message rang out most
clearly in the speech he gave on March
22nd in Havana’s newly renovated Grand
Theatre, the same venue where the last sit-
ting American president to visit Cuba, Cal-
vin Coolidge, spoke 88 years ago. Mr
Obama voiced his support for the right of
Cubans “to speak their mind”, to “protest
peacefully” and “to choose their govern-
ments in free and democratic elections”.
The speech was broadcast live to the
Cuban nation. So was a press conference
the previous day at which Mr Castro crusti-
ly replied to a question about political pris-

oners by saying “give me the list right now”
and he would order their release. Human-
rights groups responded by circulating lists
of 40 or so on social media. Mr Obama lat-
er met with dissidents, some of whom had
been brieﬂy arrested hours before his visit.
Mr Obama’s Cuba opening is popular
at home. Some of his Republican oppo-
nents criticised the visit as cosying up to
America’s enemies. That is to understate
its signiﬁcance. It was the ﬁrst time that a
visiting head of state in Cuba has called so
openly for democracy. Mr Obama may
well have planted a seed that will germi-
nate after Mr Castro steps down in 2018. 7

Bello

The drama of Lula

wing Workers’ Party (PT), he was elected
president, at the fourth attempt, in 2002.
In oﬃce he combined the pragmatism
of a trade-union leader with a determina-
tion to help Brazil’s poor. Unlike Hugo Chá-
vez he didn’t harass business. Instead, he
decreed big increases in the minimum
wage and in social programmes. Helped
by a commodity boom, it worked. In eight
years 30m left poverty. With his homespun
phrases and quick wit, Lula had a unique
rapport with ordinary Brazilians. He be-
came a global symbol of progressive social
change. “He’s my man,” gushed Barack
Obama. Lula left oﬃce with an 83% ap-
proval rating, having secured the election
of his hand-picked successor, Dilma Rous-
seﬀ, a politically clumsy bureaucrat.
So where did it go wrong? On leaving
oﬃce Lula returned to his modest ﬂat in
São Bernado, a suburb of São Paulo. He be-
came an ambassador for Brazilian busi-
ness, especially the construction compa-
nies. He charged around $100,000 a pop
for lectures. That is half the going rate for
the likes of Bill Clinton or Tony Blair. But
prosecutors say he received $8m in all, and
they doubt all the lectures took place. At

A working-class hero’s sad fall from grace
“I NEVER had access to formal study, as
Brazilians know,” wrote Luiz Inácio
Lula da Silva in an open letter to the su-
preme court this month. “I’m not a doutor,
lettered or with great knowledge of the
law,” he wrote. “But I know, like every hu-
man being, how to distinguish between
right and wrong, what is just and unjust.”
It was vintage Lula, reminding poorer Bra-
zilians that he is one of them, that like
them he suﬀers injustice meted out by the
lettered classes, and that he, like them, is
an honest man. But is he?
The missive was part of an increasing-
ly desperate defence by Brazil’s most im-
portant politician of this century. Two
years after they began investigating a hy-
dra-headed $2.5 billion corruption scan-
dal at Petrobras, the state-controlled oil
company, prosecutors are closing in on
Brazil’s former president. They think he
took gifts from construction companies
involved in the Petrobras bribery scandal,
which he vehemently denies. 
Lula has been charged with conceal-
ing ownership of a beachside apartment.
Sérgio Moro, the judge leading the probe,
had Lula brieﬂy detained to answer ques-
tions about that, as well as a country re-
treat and donations to his institute. Lula
insists the properties were borrowed and
the donations above board. On his re-
lease, he pledged a political campaign to
clear his name. Mr Moro then published
tapes of his phone calls to allies. In often
profane language, Lula cries persecution
and accuses the supreme court of coward-
ice—prompting the emollient open letter.
Only a few years ago he could do no
wrong. Born in a dirt-poor family in the
north-east, as a child he sold oranges and
peanuts on the street. He ﬁrst came to his
country’s notice as the ﬁery leader of
strikes by carworkers during Brazil’s mili-
tary dictatorship. Having founded the left-

the least Lula showed poor judgment in
drawing so close to the construction mag-
nates. But was it worse than that? The
prosecutors have not so far proved that he
has taken gifts through corrupt dealings
with Petrobras. 
André Singer, a political scientist who
once worked for Lula, calls Mr Moro, oth-
er judges, the prosecutors and their allies
in the media the “Party of Justice”. It has
long had Lula in its sights, holding him ul-
timately responsible for the scheme to
funnel tainted cash from Petrobras to the
PT and its allies. Lula denies that. His sup-
porters see in such allegations the class
hatred that he has always inspired among
the better-oﬀ, for having grabbed power
from them.
Lula is far from the ﬁrst working-class
hero to enjoy the good things in life. He is
in part a victim of his own hubris. He de-
veloped his own hatred of the centre-
right opposition. He sought to isolate it by
polarising politics between “the people”
and the “neoliberals” and by engineering
a ramshackle coalition of opportunists.
PT oﬃcials were convicted of paying
bribes to allies in an earlier scandal. Cor-
nered over this in his ﬁrst term, he fought
back. But iron had entered his soul.
Whether or not he is guilty, Lula has
lost respect. According to Datafolha, a
pollster, 57% of respondents disapprove
of him. That may preclude a return to the
presidency. The PT is set for big losses in
mayoral elections in October. But at 70,
Lula is not ﬁnished. His political skills are
still unrivalled. “I’m the only person who
could set this country on ﬁre,” he told an
ally on the tapes (adding that he didn’t
want to). Brazil is in for a long ﬁght be-
tween the Party of Justice and the leader
who has most powerfully embodied the
cause of social justice. The tragedy is that
they are not on the same side. 

Asia

The Economist March 26th 2016 47

Also in this section

48 Money launder ing in the Philippines

48 China ends its truce with Taiwan

49 South Korea and wartime sex slaves

49 The South China Sea

Banyan is on holiday

New political drama in Australia

Turnbull’s big gamble

S Y D N E Y

The prime minister threatens an early election in a bid to stamp his authority
RIGHT after Malcolm Turnbull de-
fenestrated his Liberal Party boss last
September, Australia’s new leader, the
fourth prime minister in three years, prom-
ised “substantial change” and a “diﬀerent
style of leadership” to that of Tony Abbott,
his ousted predecessor. In place of the divi-
sion and dysfunction of Mr Abbott’s time
as prime minister, Mr Turnbull would be a
unifying force, promoting sound policy
while dragging politics back to the centre
ground. After Mr Abbott’s rightist dema-
goguery, Mr Turnbull would lead through
“advocacy, not slogans”. 
Australians cheered, and the approval
ratings of the government that the (conser-
vative) Liberals lead in coalition with the
smaller National Party leapt. Mr Turnbull
talked of a new dawn. Yet until recently the
sun has shone upon the not much new. Mr
Turnbull has struggled to assert his author-
ity and carry out his promises. 
One problem lies in the Senate, where
eight senators representing tiny parties, in-
cluding the Australian Motoring Enthusi-
ast Party (mission: to safeguard people’s
right “to modify and restore vehicles based
upon their own freedom of expression”),
hold the balance of power. Another is that
the Liberal Party’s rifts remained un-
healed, with Mr Abbott and allies continu-
ing to snipe from the backbenches.
Mr Turnbull, a former investment bank-
er and businessman, has made a few poli-
cy strokes. For instance, he wants legisla-

tion to curb anti-competitive business
conduct, calling it a “long overdue reform”,
a pointed swipe at Mr Abbott, who avoid-
ed the issue. But his promised plans to re-
form taxes remain confused. At ﬁrst, his
government signalled raising the goods
and services (consumption) tax from its
present rate of 10%, and lowering income
taxes. It then seemed to drop both ideas.
Mr Turnbull now says his tax plans will be
revealed in the government’s forthcoming
budget.
Meanwhile, despite being a social liber-
al, he has pulled his punches on issues he
had hitherto promoted, including gay mar-
riage, which two-thirds of Australians sup-
port. Mr Turnbull favoured a simple parlia-
mentary vote on same-sex unions. But
now he has stuck to Mr Abbott’s proposal
of a plebiscite to gauge public opinion, and
to hold it after the next election. One esti-
mate puts the cost at A$525m ($399m).
He is paying the price for apparent drift.
An opinion poll on March 21st gave the
government just a two-point lead over the
opposition Labor Party. As for Mr Turn-
bull’s own approval as prime minister, it
has sunk to 39%, from 60% in November.
His lead as preferred prime minister over
the leader of the Labor Party, Bill Shorten,
has also narrowed.
Yet in the past few days Mr Turnbull has
embarked on a series of canny steps de-
signed to break the Senate logjam, set his
stamp on his own party and keep the op-

For daily analysis and debate on Asia, visit

Economist.com/asia

position oﬀ balance. On March 18th he
won approval from Parliament to simplify
the convoluted system of proportional rep-
resentation under which Australians elect
the Senate. The power of independents
and so-called micro-parties has grown.
They have learnt to use vote-swapping
deals at elections to increase their numbers
in the Senate. There they have blocked gov-
ernment legislation they dislike. But now
the prime minister has won support from
the Australian Greens, with ten senators to
push through changes that a parliamenta-
ry committee recommended two years
ago. Rather than being bound in Senate
elections by second-preference votes that
parties allocate, voters will now be free to
specify their own order of voting.
Mr Turnbull called that and related
changes a “great day for democracy”, by
which he really meant for the bigger par-
ties, since smaller ones will struggle in fu-
ture to muster enough votes to qualify for a
Senate seat. Two micro-party senators
have launched a High Court appeal against
the changes, but Mr Turnbull sounds conﬁ-
dent that it will fail.

Now to the polls
Soon after Parliament voted on the Senate
changes, it adjourned. It was due to return
for the government to present its budget on
May 10th, ahead of an election that was
widely expected for September. Yet Mr
Turnbull’s next move, on March 21st, sug-
gested that the campaign has begun al-
ready. The prime minister called a press
conference to declare that he would recall
Parliament three weeks early, in order, he
said, to consider legislation to police the
building industry and the unions that play
a powerful part in it. (The industry har-
bours two-thirds of Australia’s industrial
disputes.) He wants to re-establish the Aus-
tralian Building and Construction Com-

1

48 Asia

2 mission that the previous Labor govern-
ment abolished. Last year in the Senate,
Labor, the Australian Greens and indepen-
dents defeated a move by the Abbott gov-
ernment to bring the commission back. A
second Senate defeat would give Mr Turn-
bull a constitutional trigger for a rare “dou-
ble dissolution” of both houses of Parlia-
ment and an election, on July 2nd.
The timing of Mr Turnbull’s move took
nearly everyone by surprise, as did his Sep-
tember coup against Mr Abbott. In the
House of Representatives, Mr Shorten de-
clared that it was a mark of a government
in “full panic mode”. But the prime minis-
ter will claim the high ground by accusing
Labor of being beholden to unions. As for
the Senate, the new voting rules give him a
better chance than before of winning con-
trol of the chamber.
Still, it all remains a gamble for Mr Turn-
bull. The unresolved divisions in his party
are just one symptom of what Stephen
Loosley, a former Labor senator, decries as
the “indulgent politics” of both sides. And
should the Senate reforms work his way,
then, for the second time, Mr Turnbull will
need to convince Australians that he is the
one to change the political culture. 7

Money launder ing in the Philippines

Walls of silence

M A N I L A

Bank thieves pick just the place for
washing their money
FROM the air, rich Chinese ﬂying into the
Philippines to gamble or Filipinos ﬂying
out to work overseas for a living can see the
distinctive Solaire Resort and Casino be-
side the murky waters of Manila Bay. It was
into these auspicious premises in early
February that a money-remittance com-
pany, Philrem, moved about $60m stolen
from Bangladesh’s central bank, delivering
over half of it in cash. The money was part
of $101m taken, of which $81m ended up in
the Philippines. In all, only $20m has so far
been recovered.
Once behind the walls of the Solaire Re-
sort, the swag disappeared, converted into
untraceable gambling chips (other money
went to an online gaming ﬁrm). “Our mon-
ey trail ended up at the casinos,” the exec-
utive director of the Philippines’ Anti-
Money Laundering Council (AMLC), Julia
Bacay-Abad, has told a Senate committee
holding public hearings into the case.
The AMLC picked up the trail behind
the frosted-glass frontage of a branch of Ri-
zal Commercial Banking Corporation
(RCBC) in the country’s ﬁnancial centre,
Makati, in the capital of Manila. There, the
Senate committee was told, the branch

The Economist March 26th 2016

Relations between China and Taiwan

The Gambia
gambit

T A I P E I

China resumes an old diplomatic game
TAIWAN and China, which claims the
independent island-nation as part of
the motherland, used to play a joyless slog-
ging game called “dollar diplomacy”. In it
each side competed with lorry-loads of
cash and other inducements to get small,
impoverished and often ill-run nations to
switch their diplomatic allegiance. It was a
game that Taiwan was steadily losing until,
as a gesture of goodwill on the ascension
of a China-friendly president in Taiwan,
Ma Ying-jeou, China suddenly suspended
it in 2008. The score: Taiwan 22, China 172.
Yet on March 17th China suddenly re-
sumed play, by establishing diplomatic ties
with Gambia, once a Taiwan ally. Mr Ma
was on a state visit to Belize, one of Tai-
wan’s surviving friends, when the news
broke. He said it was very wrong. In Tai-
wan there was outrage. The mainland af-
fairs ministry said China’s move ran con-
trary to the mutual trust that Taiwan and
China had built up over eight years. 
But the game is being played not against
him, but rather against his successor, Tsai
Ing-wen, who takes oﬃce on May 20th. So
far as China is concerned, the trouble with
Ms Tsai is that she heads a party, the Demo-
cratic Progressive Party (DPP), that unlike
Mr Ma’s Kuomintang is committed, at least
on paper, to Taiwan’s declaring formal in-
dependence. 
No matter that Ms Tsai, a low-key for-
mer trade lawyer who won the presiden-
tial election in January in a landslide, has
gone out of her way to reassure not just
China but also the United States that she
intends to pursue peace and stability
across the Taiwan Strait. That is in stark
contrast to her ﬁrebrand predecessor from
the DPP, Chen Shui-bian, who was presi-
dent from 2000 to 2008 (and then jailed for
corruption). Under Mr Chen, cross-strait
relations reached a nadir. His studiously
provocative championing of Taiwan’s in-
dependence even strained Taiwan’s ties
with the United States, its defender.
Yet the sticking point for China is that
Ms Tsai has to date refused to concede to
Chinese demands that her government-in-
waiting accept that Taiwan is loosely part
of China. This is often referred to as the
“1992 consensus”, in which both sides
agreed that there was but one China, even
though each disagreed over what exactly
that was. The Communist and proudly
atheist government in Beijing is so in thrall
to this belief system that it threatens inva-
sion should formal independence—ie, an 

1

Enter here, and vanish

manager used what may have been
dummy accounts to receive the stolen
money and then transferred it to the remit-
tance company. The manager refused to
answer many of the committee’s ques-
tions for fear of incriminating herself, and
her superiors refused to answer some be-
cause the law protects the secrecy of bank
accounts—even, it seems, fake ones.
If the senators failed to get the answers
they wanted, they knew why. In 2013 Con-
gress amended the Anti-Money Launder-
ing Act. The amendments were only tough
enough to ensure that an international
watchdog, the Financial Action Task Force,
would not put the Philippines on its black-
list of untrustworthy countries—for that
would have constricted the ﬂow of remit-
tances from millions of Filipino migrant
workers that keeps the economy aﬂoat. Ca-
sinos were speciﬁcally excluded from the
new legislation and are consequently ex-
empt from reporting on their operations or
on speciﬁc players.
As it stands, the law suits the political
establishment nicely. In her column on
March 18th the editor of the Philippine Star,
Ana Marie Pamintuan, described the Sen-
ate as the “upper chamber of the nation’s
biggest and most successful Laundro-
mat”—encapsulating the insalubrious en-
tanglement of money and politics in the
Philippines, as politicians take from the
public purse and wash the money clean.
But as domestic and international con-
demnation has grown about how the sto-
len money was laundered through the
Philippines, the country’s gaming regula-
tor says he is amenable to the AMLC ex-
tending its reach to the casinos. The gover-
nor of the central bank also laments the
Philippines’ lax regime to counter money
laundering. A government spokesman, on
the other hand, appeared unruﬄed by the
disappearance of the loot. “On the whole,”
he explained helpfully, “you can see the
system is working.” 7

The Economist March 26th 2016

Asia 49

2 end to the pretence that there is only one
China—ever be declared. To date, Ms Tsai
has avoided even saying that a consensus
was reached in 1992.
It is not certain that the diplomatic
game will now resume with full intensity.
Gambia, an impoverished west African
dictatorship, actually severed ties with Tai-
wan in 2013. It was China that for three
years respected the truce and turned down

Gambian requests for ties. Recently Gam-
bia got the signal and began learning the
script. Shortly after its foreign minister, Ne-
neh MacDouall-Gaye, signed the papers in
Beijing with her counterpart, Wang Yi, she
declared that her country looked forward
to the peaceful reuniﬁcation of China and
Taiwan.
Now, says George Tsai, a political scien-
tist (unrelated to the president) at the Chi-

South Korea and wartime sex slaves

Kindred spirits

S E O U L

zainichi, ethnic-Korean Japanese. Right-
wing groups in Japan have tried to smear
such actors online. The ﬁlm has had over
3m viewers since it opened a month ago,
a remarkable success for an independent
feature ﬁlm in South Korea. Having taken
14 years to make, it has been spurned by
mainstream production houses and
distributors because of its diﬃcult subject
matter. In the end its director, Cho Jung-
rae, relied on the contributions of over
75,000 individuals for about half of his
funding, including from many Japanese.
A deal struck in December between
the governments of South Korea and
Japan to make amends to Korean women
forced into prostitution has revived
interest in their plight. For others, it is all
too close to the bone still. Hong Ji-yea, an
oﬃce worker, says she bought a ticket to
support the ﬁlm but was “not brave
enough” to watch it. A friend who teach-
es young army oﬃcers gave hers and
others’ tickets to her students. Ms Hong
says that she hopes they might reﬂect on
how diﬃcult it is to stay human in war.

A bestselling ﬁlm on a subject shunned by most producers strikes a chord
“I HEARD we are all going to a shoe
factory,” says one of the terriﬁed
teenage girls in the ﬁlm hopefully, hud-
dled on the ﬂoor of a train bound for
north-eastern China in 1943. In pastel
linen dresses, and recently taken from
their homes by soldiers of the Japanese
imperial army, the captive girls will soon
be beaten and raped repeatedly in a
“comfort station”, one of the hundreds of
military brothels that were set up to cater
to soldiers in Japanese-occupied territory
during the second world war.
Up to 200,000 women, mainly Kore-
an and Chinese, but also including many
South-East Asians and a few Dutch and
Australians, were enslaved. It remains a
source of deep resentment for South
Korea, and has long been at the heart of
its troubled relations with Japan. There
the shrill voices of historical revisionists,
who dispute that women were coerced—
there were, after all, also volunteers from
Japan and elsewhere—have grown loud-
er in recent years. And then not all South
Koreans acknowledge that much of the
recruitment was carried out by Korean
community leaders and unscrupulous
operators.
“Spirits’ Homecoming” is a moving
portrayal of these girls’ tragic and some-
times short lives, based on testimony
from survivors (44 Korean “comfort
women” remain alive today). It is set
against glorious (South) Korean country-
side, and overlaid with the country’s
best-loved folk songs. It is true that most
of the Japanese soldiers are depicted as
brutes, as with nearly all South Korean
ﬁlms about Japan’s colonial occupation
of Korea. But some Japanese are treated
as victims too. Gentle Tanaka comes to
the brothel, but he does not touch Jung-
min, the ﬁlm’s battered 14-year-old pro-
tagonist. Instead he oﬀers kind words
and eventually a map to help her escape.
South Korean blockbusters typically
cast Koreans with jarringly bad accents in
Japanese villains’ roles. Mr Cho has used
native Japanese speakers, among them

The hard road to China

nese Culture University in Taipei, the Tai-
wanese capital, the ball is in Ms Tsai’s
court. China, he says, will wait for her inau-
guration speech for signals about her in-
tentions. If the speech does not, in the eyes
of Chinese leaders, rehearse an acceptable
catechism, the diplomatic game could fully
resume, or worse. “We absolutely will not
allow…national separation,” thundered
President Xi Jinping recently.
A former DPP vice-minister, Tung Chen-
yuan, highlights how mismatched the two
sides now are. In 1992 the mainland’s GDP
was 1.9 times larger than Taiwan’s. By 2014
the gap between the two economies had
widened to nearly 20 times. These days
China gets to set the conditions that Tai-
wan is expected to meet if good relations
are to exist. 7

The South China Sea

China v the rest

S I N G A P O R E

As the sea becomes more militarised,
the risks of conﬂict grow
FOR years China has sought to divide
and rule in the South China Sea. It
worked hard to prevent the countries chal-
lenging it over some or all of its absurdly
aggrandising territorial claims in the sea
from ganging up against it. So when ten-
sions with one rival claimant were high, it
tended not to provoke others.
Not any more. In a kind of united-front
policy in reverse, it now seems content to
antagonise them all at the same time. This
is both encouraging closer co-operation
among neighbours and driving them clos-
er to external powers including India, Aus-
tralia, Japan and, above all, America.
The latest ﬁght China has picked is with
a country with which—unlike Brunei, Ma-
laysia, the Philippines, Taiwan and Viet-
nam—it has no territorial dispute: Indone-
sia. On March 21st the chargé d’aﬀaires at
China’s embassy in Jakarta was hauled in
to receive a stiﬀ protest. A Chinese coast-
guard vessel had rammed free a Chinese
ﬁshing boat as it was towed into port after
being caught allegedly ﬁshing in Indone-
sian waters. The crew of eight was already
in detention. In a similar incident three
years ago, Indonesia released detained
crew members when confronted by an
armed “maritime law-enforcement” ves-
sel belonging to China’s ﬁsheries bureau. 
Since that incident Indonesia has elect-
ed a new president, Joko Widodo, one of
whose trumpeted policies has been to
look after the interests of ﬁshermen. To de-
ter illegal interlopers, Indonesia now im-
pounds and blows up foreign vessels
caught poaching. In this case, it seems clear 

1

C H I N A

TAIWAN

S o u t h

C h i n a

Woody
Island

S e a

Pa ra c e l
I s land s

Scarborough
Shoal

PHILIPPINES

Manila

HAINAN

Triton
Island

V

I

E

T

N
A

M

Subi Reef

Sp ra t l y
I s land s

Gaven Reefs
Fiery Cross
Reef
Cuarteron
Reef

Mischief
Reef
Hughes
Reef
Johnson
South
Reef

P ala w a n

Antonio
Bautista
air base

250 km

Chinese
Reclamation work

BRUNEI

Natuna
Islands

MALAYSIA

China’s
“nine-dash line”
Airstr ips

Sources: amti.csis.org;
janes.com; lawfareblog.com

I N D ONESIA

straint” in the South China Sea, and in par-
ticular to refrain from occupying uninhab-
ited features such as reefs. That commit-
ment is hard to square with the massive
building spree on which China has been
engaged for the past two years in the
Spratly archipelago, turning seven unin-
habitable rocks and reefs submerged at
high tide into artiﬁcial islands. Vietnam
and the Philippines, rival claimants, have
naturally been outraged. And this month
an American admiral has reported Chi-
nese activity at Scarborough Shoal, north
of the Spratlys, that suggests it might be the
“next possible area of reclamation”. China
bullied the Philippines away from the
shoal four years ago.

50 Asia

2 that the Chinese were in Indonesian wa-
ters. Indonesia claims that the boat was
just four kilometres oﬀ the Natuna islands,
well within Indonesia’s 12 nautical-mile
territorial limit, let alone its 200-nautical-
mile “exclusive economic zone” (EEZ).
China explicitly acknowledges Indone-
sian sovereignty over the Natunas. Yet in-
stead of apologising, China’s foreign min-
istry demanded the ﬁshermen’s release,
claiming that they had been carrying out
“normal operations” in “traditional Chi-
nese ﬁshing grounds”. China is a party to
the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea
(UNCLOS), under which countries are enti-
tled to territorial waters and EEZs. Yet the
government’s implicit argument is that a
self-proclaimed “tradition” trumps inter-
national law. By extension, with 5,000
years of sacred history touted ad nauseam
by its Communist Party leaders, who is to
deny China anything it wants?
China’s tradition-based argument also
has implications for its “nine-dash line”
(see map) delimiting its claim to virtually
all of the South China Sea (and passing just
north of the Natunas). It would suggest
China believes it has rights over not just
land features inside the line, and their terri-
torial seas and EEZs, but also over all the
water itself—a concept alien to UNCLOS.

Flaky claims, fake islands
China has declined to explain how its
claims ﬁt within UNCLOS parameters. In-
deed it has a record of ﬂouting the law and
international agreements when it comes to
the sea. In 2002 it signed a joint declaration
with the ten-member Association of
South-East Asian Nations, in which the
parties undertook to “exercise self-re-

Is your going to Scarborough fair?

The Economist March 26th 2016

The Philippines has asked an interna-
tional tribunal, the Permanent Court of Ar-
bitration in The Hague, to rule on some of
China’s claims under UNCLOS. The court is
expected to announce its verdict soon. If it
rules broadly in favour of the Philippines,
it would have the eﬀect of making clear
that China’s nine-dash line has no legal ba-
sis. China is boycotting the case and says it
will ignore the verdict. The ruling might
embarrass China. But it will not stop it cre-
ating artiﬁcial islands, or indeed make it
dismantle those it has already built.
It seems increasingly likely that the is-
lands will have a military purpose. China
denies that, but it is hard to see why else it
needs the long airstrip it is building on the
Fiery Cross reef in the Spratlys. It is in this
context that the threat of building at Scar-
borough Shoal causes such alarm. China
has controlled the whole of the Paracel
chain in the north of the South China Sea
since 1974, when it drove out the former
South Vietnamese from part of it. It has re-
cently installed missile batteries on Woody
Island there. In the Spratlys to the south it is
building what look like potential air and
naval bases, complete with military-grade
radars. Scarborough Shoal would com-
plete a “strategic triangle” that would al-
low it to dominate the sea. China is widely
expected one day to declare an “air de-
fence identiﬁcation zone” over the sea, as it
has over parts of the East China Sea, in-
cluding areas contested with Japan.
Aggressors rarely see themselves as
such. Indeed China accuses the United
States of being the driving force behind the
“militarisation” of the sea. Certainly Amer-
ica is responding to Chinese moves. Last
year it resumed naval “freedom of naviga-
tion” operations, sending warships close to
disputed features. This month it sent an air-
craft-carrier strike group into the sea.
American naval and marine-corps com-
manders have been in Vietnam to explore
co-operation. Worse, from China’s view-
point, American forces have just obtained
access to ﬁve Philippine bases, including
an airbase on Palawan, just opposite the
Spratlys. For this, China’s oﬃcial news
agency accused America of “muddying
the waters” and “making the Asia-Paciﬁc a
second Middle East”. 
China will not be deterred, conﬁdent
that America is unlikely to risk a serious
crisis, let alone conﬂict. China’s throwing
its weight around in the sea erodes Ameri-
ca’s credibility as the pre-eminent military
power in the western Paciﬁc, but does not
directly threaten it. By contrast, rather than
cow China, America’s enhanced military
role gives it a pretext to carry on with its
build-up. There is still the danger, however,
of an accidental ﬂare-up—a skirmish over
illegal ﬁshing, for example, and an ensuing
escalation. Armed conﬂict in the South
China Sea is a long way from being inevita-
ble. But it is far from unthinkable. 7

China

The Economist March 26th 2016 51

Urbanisation

Reform’s big taboo

C H O N G Q I N G

An ambitious plan for social change has run into trouble
“I LIKE it here,” says Zhang Xiaojie, as
she surveys the crowds scurrying be-
low her spick-and-span apartment. Mi-
grant workers bend under sacks of ﬂour or
lug around huge circular saws for use on
the building sites where they work. Young
professionals crowd into a local restaurant.
Ms Zhang, a young information-technol-
ogy oﬃcer, is one of millions of people
from the countryside who have ﬂocked for
work to Chongqing, a province-sized “mu-
nicipality” in south-western China (its core
city has the same name). She looks around
at a forest of 30-storey tower blocks, all
built and run by the local government, and
smiles: “It’s a good place to live. The gov-
ernment has done a pretty good job.” 
Chongqing is the setting for China’s
most ambitious social reforms. They are
aimed at keeping economic expansion go-
ing while ensuring that the huge social
changes unleashed by growth do not per-
petuate inequalities, or foment unrest.
Some 250m people have moved from the
countryside to cities, the greatest migration
in history. Millions live in dormitories or
doss down where they can. Most have no
formal contracts with their employers, and
are denied access to urban public services
such as subsidised education and health
care. As the country’s growth slows, the
Communist Party hopes migrants will

play an even bigger role in boosting the
economy, not just by toiling in factories,
but by joining the middle class and spend-
ing their new wealth. So it is looking for
ways to improve their lot. 
For several years, Chongqing’s eﬀorts to
achieve this have gone further than any-
where else in the country. Though called a
municipality, Chongqing covers an area
the size of Scotland. Around 12m of its resi-
dents are villagers; another 18m live in the
core city and other widely scattered towns.
As elsewhere in China, the urban popula-
tion has been growing fast thanks to a rap-
id inﬂux of migrants (some are pictured).
To manage this better, Chongqing persuad-
ed the central government nine years ago
to let it test out new ways of handling the
newcomers and of making good use of the
land they leave behind. The municipality’s
special political status may have helped: it
ranks on a par with Beijing and Shanghai. 
Under Bo Xilai, a now-imprisoned rival
to President Xi Jinping, the municipality’s
government touted what admirers called
the “Chongqing model”. This involved
three main initiatives. First, the govern-
ment said it would build 40m square me-
tres of housing in the decade to 2020 for
rent to the urban poor, including rural mi-
grants. To be eligible, tenants had to earn
less than 1,500 yuan (now about $230) a

month. It was a big undertaking: govern-
ments elsewhere in China are reluctant to
spend money on housing migrant work-
ers. Chongqing set the rent at about 60% of
comparable private properties and al-
lowed tenants to buy their homes after liv-
ing in them for ﬁve years. 
Next, the government said it would give
full urban status to 10m migrants, meaning
they would get access to subsidised urban
health care and education (typically, these
services are available only in the place of
one’s household registration, or hukou—
usually the place of birth of one’s mother
or father). Third, the government an-
nounced changes to the urban-planning
system to allow land left behind by mi-
grants to be traded for use in building new
houses and oﬃces. That was a break-
through in a country that still oﬃcially dis-
approves of selling farmers’ property.
The reforms are unique in scale and co-
herence. By providing housing, they aim to
attract migrants and thus expand the ur-
ban labour force. By oﬀering migrants bet-
ter access to public services they aim to
make life in cities fairer and thus more sta-
ble. By introducing a land market, they
hope that migrants will arrive with cash in
hand. If the reforms work, they should
have a range of beneﬁts, from reducing the
loss of farm land to eroding age-old urban
prejudice against farmers and, vitally for
the economy, fuelling urban consumption.

Breaking down barriers
The most promising and controversial of
the reforms involves the trading of rural
land, at a price set by the market. Urban
China is used to free trade in property, but
in the countryside farmers are not allowed
to sell their homes, nor the land they till. 

1

52 China

2 The idea of revising Mao’s hallowed no-
tion of “collective” ownership of rural
property remains all but taboo. 
That creates problems. As people move,
they often leave houses in the countryside
unoccupied. Chongqing’s reform allows
land used for housing in faraway villages
to be converted to use for farming, and a
corresponding amount of farmland near
towns to be used for urban expansion. The
aim is to promote urbanisation, while
slowing the rate at which Chongqing loses
arable land. (National self-suﬃciency in
food is one of the party’s obsessions.) 
The reform was intended to be of par-
ticular beneﬁt to farmers in remote areas,
who would otherwise have no opportuni-
ty to beneﬁt from land appropriations,
which usually occur on city margins.
Sometimes the compulsory acquisition of
rural land for construction is carried out
violently, with farmers receiving little or no
compensation. Chongqing’s system aims
to make this fairer. Farmers who want to
sell their rights to their village land are giv-
en what is called a land ticket, or dipiao. De-
velopers who want to build, say, a 10-hect-
are (25-acre) project on farmland, can buy
10-hectares’ worth of dipiao. They do not
have to be tickets owned by farmers on
that very plot. The farmers get to keep 85%
of the sale price of the dipiao. Their village
administrations get the rest.
This new market allowed the trading of
land-use rights to rise from nothing in 2008
to over 3,500 hectares’ worth in 2011 (see
chart). Since then the amount traded annu-
ally has levelled out at around 1,300 hect-
ares, worth roughly 4 billion yuan. The
market has enthused villagers. In Wulong
county, about three hour’s drive from the
main city, the oﬃce in charge of dipiao trad-
ing is literally knee-deep in applications
from farmers who want to sell.
Chongqing’s reforms have helped its
economy. Rural migrants attracted by
cheap housing, health and education have
provided a ready supply of labour for the
municipality’s fast-growing car- and com-
puter-making industries (Chongqing is the
world’s largest maker of laptops). Doubt-
less the lure of good wages in these fac-
tories would have drawn many farmers
into urban areas anyway. But Chongqing’s
economy has performed better than many
other inland cities; for the past ﬁve years its
GDP growth has been about three points
above the national average.
The reforms may also have helped re-
duce outbreaks of social unrest. China La-
bour Bulletin, an NGO based in Hong
Kong, says there were 42 known labour-re-
lated protests in Chongqing last year, com-
pared with 121 in Shenzhen, a coastal city
with half of Chongqing’s urban popula-
tion. So far, Chongqing has been able to
avoid a backlash among holders of urban
hukou, many of whom, as elsewhere in
China, fear that already strained public ser-

And somewhere to park the car, one day

vices may be overwhelmed if migrants
gain more rights. 
But the municipality has not fulﬁlled its
promises. Only about 15m square metres
of public housing have been built (one pro-
ject is pictured), half the amount that was
supposed to be ﬁnished by now. One pro-
blem has been the enormous cost. Yang Ji-
rui of Sichuan International Studies Uni-
versity reckons that the municipality has
spent about 50 billion yuan building pub-
lic housing so far and would need another
50 billion to meet its construction target.
He says the government may only be able
to achieve this by encouraging private de-
velopers to do the building, and by oﬀering
to subsidise the rents of poorer tenants.
The Chinese Academy of Social Sciences
calculates that it costs about 100,000 yuan
(in total) to provide schooling, health care
and other beneﬁts for each rural migrant
who becomes eligible to use urban ser-
vices. For every 1m migrants, that means
another 100 billion yuan. 
Another problem has been that many
migrants still feel a strong sense of attach-
ment to their rural land, even after they
move into the cities. This is because of the
entitlement they enjoy by law, as people
from the countryside, to farm a family plot
and to use a piece of land for their housing.
Most farmers jealously guard that right:
they see it as a form of insurance should
they fail to make ends meet in the cities.
Many farmers are reluctant to apply for ur-
ban hukou because they fear it would
mean having to give up these rights.
Through no fault of Chongqing’s, distri-
bution of urban hukou has thus fallen far
short of the target of 10m. Around 4m mi-
grants have opted to switch their hukou sta-
tus since 2010. Most are young and better-
educated people: those with the best pros-
pects in the cities and the least inclination
to keep a rural bolthole. Some families
have tried to ensure they have both kinds
of documents. Yang Xianlu is a 60-year-old

The Economist March 26th 2016

farmer in Wulong county. He says he was
oﬀered urban hukou but turned it down.
His daughter-in-law and grandson (who
work in the main city) have both applied
for it, however. If they succeed, he says, the
family would have the best of both worlds.
To calm migrants’ fears about taking ur-
ban hukou, Chongqing has oﬀered conces-
sions: it has granted farmers who apply for
it a three-year grace period during which
they may change their minds. It has also al-
lowed new holders of urban hukou to re-
tain their farming rights—certainly the best
of both worlds. In September 2015 it went
further still, giving holders of rural hukou
access to most urban social services. This
sharply narrowed the formal diﬀerence
between urban and rural dwellers. 
Similarly the dipiao system has not tak-
en oﬀ as initially expected. Some oﬃcials
had hoped it would eventually develop
into a genuine free market for rural proper-
ty: if the dipiao system was seen to work on
a small scale, they ﬁgured, scruples about
selling collective land might be overcome.
But again, through no fault of their own,
the dreams of Chongqing’s reformers have
not been fulﬁlled. That is because oﬃcials
in Beijing remain nervous of big land re-
form. Many oﬃcials are haunted by the
(unsubstantiated) notion that allowing
farmers to trade their property freely might
prompt millions of them to sell up and
move into cities, with no place to return to
if they fail to prosper. 
Recently, there has been a bit of belated
encouragement from on high. In January
the ﬁnance minister, Lou Jiwei, said other
places could try out dipiao trading. Presi-
dent Xi also paid a visit to Chongqing that
month. It was the ﬁrst by a Chinese presi-
dent since the municipality’s reforms be-
gan, and was widely interpreted as a sign
of his endorsement of Chongqing’s eﬀorts.
But neither men expressed full-throated
support for the reforms. Mr Xi likely fears
that promoting them may impose crip-
pling ﬁnancial burdens on local govern-
ments and unleash yet more uncontrolla-
ble social forces. He may be a leader of
enormous power, but he is afraid to use it
to make the changes China most needs. 7

Dipiao demand

Land-ticket transactions in Chongqing
Amount of land traded
Value of transactions

Hectares, ’000

Yuan, bn

4

3

2

1

0

2008

09

10

11

12

13

14

Source: Land Resources and Housing
Management Bureau, Chongqing

16

12

8

4

0

International

The Economist March 26th 2016 53

Also in this section

54 Who should get the HPV vaccine?

Vaccination

A jab in time

Some Western countries have lower vaccination rates than poor parts of Africa.
Anti-vaxxers are not the main culprits
ERADICATING a disease is the sort of
aim that rich countries come up with,
and poor ones struggle to reach. But for
some diseases, the pattern is reversed.
These are the ailments for which vaccina-
tions exist. Many poor countries run highly
eﬀective vaccination programmes. But as
memories of the toll from infectious dis-
eases fades across the rich world, in some
places they are making a comeback. 
The World Health Organisation (WHO)
reckons that vaccines save 2.5m lives a
year. Smallpox was eradicated in 1980 with
the help of a vaccine; polio should soon
follow. In both cases, rich countries led the
way. The new pattern looks very diﬀerent. 
The trend is most evident for measles,
which is highly contagious. At least 95% of
people must be vaccinated to stop its
spread (a threshold known as “herd immu-
nity”). Although usually mild, it can lead to
pneumonia and cause brain damage or
blindness. The countries with the lowest
vaccination rates are all very poor, but
many developing countries run excellent
programmes (see chart on next page). Eri-
trea, Rwanda and Sri Lanka manage to vac-
cinate nearly everyone. By contrast several
rich countries, including America, Britain,
France and Italy, are below herd immunity.
Last year Europe missed the deadline it
had set itself in 2010 to eradicate measles,
and had almost 4,000 cases. America was
declared measles-free in 2000; in 2014 it
had hundreds of cases across 27 states and
last year saw its ﬁrst death from the disease

in more than a decade. The trends for other
vaccine-preventable diseases, such as ru-
bella, which can cause congenital disabili-
ties if a pregnant woman catches it, are
alarming, too. 
This sorry state of aﬀairs is often
blamed on hardline “anti-vaxxers”, par-
ents who refuse all vaccines for their chil-
dren. They are a motley lot. The Amish in
America spurn modern medicine, along
with almost everything else invented since
the 17th century. Some vegans object to the
use of animal-derived products in vac-
cines’ manufacture. The Protestant Dutch
Reformed Church thinks vaccines thwart
divine will. Anthroposophy, founded in
the 19th century by Rudolf Steiner, an Aus-
trian mystic-cum-philosopher, preaches
that diseases strengthen children’s physi-
cal and mental development. 
In most countries such refuseniks are
only 2-3% of parents. But because they tend
to live in clusters, they can be the source of
outbreaks. A bigger problem, though, is the
growing number of parents who delay vac-
cination, or pick and choose jabs. Studies
from America, Australia and Europe sug-
gest that about a quarter of parents fall into
this group, generally because they think
that the standard vaccination schedule,
which protects against around a dozen dis-
eases, “overloads” children’s immune sys-
tems, or that particular vaccines are unsafe.
Some believe vaccines interfere with “nat-
ural immunity”. Many were shaken by a
claim, later debunked, that there was a link

between autism and the MMR vaccine,
which protects against measles, mumps
and rubella.
In America, some poor children miss
out on vaccines despite a federal pro-
gramme to provide the jabs free, since they
have no regular relationship with a family
doctor. Some outbreaks in eastern Europe
have started in communities of Roma (gyp-
sies). Members of this poor and ostracised
minority are shunned by health workers
and often go unvaccinated. 
Several governments are trying to raise
vaccination rates by making life harder for
parents who do not vaccinate their chil-
dren. A measles outbreak last year that
started with an unvaccinated child visiting
Disneyland and spread from there to seven
states prompted California to make a full
vaccination record a condition of entry to
state schools. The previous year, in a quar-
ter of schools too few children had been
vaccinated against measles to confer herd
immunity. A dozen other states are consid-
ering similar bills. After a toddler died from
measles last year, Germany recently start-
ed to oblige parents who do not wish their
children to be vaccinated to discuss the de-
cision with a doctor before they can enroll
a child in nursery. Australia’s new “no jabs,
no pay” law withdraws child beneﬁts from
parents who do not vaccinate, unless they
have sound medical reasons.

Persuasion, a ﬁne art
There is, however, surprisingly little evi-
dence that tough laws make a big diﬀer-
ence to vaccination rates. European coun-
tries that are similar in most respects (such
as the Nordics) may have similar rates for
jabs that are mandatory in one country but
not in another—or very diﬀerent rates de-
spite having the same rules. Rates in some
American states where parents can easily
opt out are as high as in West Virginia and
Mississippi, which have long allowed only 

1

54 International

HPV vaccines

The cost of embarrassment

A jab to ward oﬀ cervical cancer is standard for girls. Should boys have it, too?
THE causes of many cancers are myste-
rious. Not so for cervical cancer: in
nearly all cases the villain is the human
papillomavirus (HPV), a common sexual-
ly transmitted infection. In more than 60
countries girls are routinely vaccinated
against the strains that cause the majority
of cases. But in only a handful, including
Austria, Australia, America, Switzerland,
and some regions of Canada and Ger-
many, are boys vaccinated, too.
To decide who should get the jab,
health authorities use mathematical
models that tally the costs of various
vaccination protocols and expected
beneﬁts. Vaccinating boys means that
fewer will catch the virus and transmit it
to girls; whether that is worth the cost
depends on how many of those girls
have already received the vaccine. A high
vaccination rate among girls alone does
much more to protect girls than a lower
one among both girls and boys, says
Paulus Bloem from the World Health
Organisation (WHO). An analysis of
America’s programme, published in 2011,
concluded that gaining an extra year of
healthy life by vaccinating boys cost eight
times more if three-quarters of girls are
covered than if only a ﬁfth are.
Unsurprisingly, the price of the HPV
vaccine also inﬂuences the result of

cost-beneﬁt analyses. A price break was
reportedly inﬂuential in Australia’s deci-
sion to include boys in the national pro-
gramme. Price negotiations are usually
conﬁdential, but the WHO is trying to
strengthen governments’ bargaining
positions by publishing what some say
they paid. Also helping to bring costs
down is recent research showing that
two doses at age 9-14 are as good as the
standard three at age 16-25. Several coun-
tries have already switched.
The most recent cost-beneﬁt analyses
also include the rarer cancers that HPV
causes in men, including of the penis,
anus and throat. These are much more
common in gay men: their rate of anal
cancer is the same as the rate of cervical
cancer for women who are not screened
for it. Tests that spot precursors to cervical
cancer have saved many lives by catching
cases early; there are no such tests for
some of HPV’s male cancers.
Some gay-rights activists lament that
this argument for giving the jab to boys is
ignored because even liberal politicians
prefer not to talk about the realities of gay
sex. Women had to campaign hard to
break through the embarrassment that
meant cancers of the breast and repro-
ductive organs often went undiagnosed.
The lesson is that such silence can kill.

The Economist March 26th 2016

whelmed by information that they regard
as inconclusive or contradictory. One
mother seeks advice on how to get around
California’s “fascist” new rule. Another
casts doubt on a study on severe allergic re-
actions to vaccines: 33 cases from 25m jabs,
she says, seems “ﬁshily low”. 
Some countries are starting informa-
tion campaigns that treat such concerns
with respect. A parents’ organisation in
Bulgaria launched one recently, under the
auspices of the ministry of health and the
national association of paediatricians. Its
website is jargon-free and easier to navi-
gate than unwieldy oﬃcial hubs. France is
launching a national dialogue on vaccines
this spring, with a website where citizens
can swap gripes, worries and advice.
Although vaccine-hesitant parents of-
ten search for answers on the internet,
their most trusted sources are doctors and
nurses. The WHO recently developed
guidelines to help health workers ﬁgure
out, through a questionnaire, which type
of worrier a parent is—and how to alleviate
speciﬁc concerns. But recent research from
several European countries shows that
many doctors and nurses are also hesitant
about vaccines, for much the same reasons
as their patients. In a survey conducted in
2014, 16-43% of French family doctors said
they never or only sometimes recom-
mended some of the standard vaccines. 
An additional problem is that many
adults were not immunised as children
and have not caught up since. In the 1970s
and 1980s, when the measles vaccine was
new, many children did not receive it, or
got just one shot, which is now known not
to be reliable in conferring immunity.
Some countries oﬀer free catch-up jabs to
some adults when outbreaks ﬂare up—usu-
ally parents with small children and health
workers in aﬀected areas. 
But such eﬀorts have, on the whole,
been too little, too late. The return of easily
preventable diseases that had all but disap-
peared is a shame. A bigger shame would
be for governments to continue blaming it
all on ignorant parents. 7

HERD-
IMMUNIT Y
THRESHOLD

One promising new approach is to keep
track of the vaccine myths circulating in
cyberspace and rebut each one as it ap-
pears. This requires tracking information
from search engines and following anti-
vaccination websites and parents’ forums.
On one such forum, worriers say they
have scoured government and vaccine-
manufacturer websites but
feel over-

An ounce of prevention

Measles vaccination and GDP, 2014 or latest available
Er itrea Rwanda
Sr i Lanka
Tanzania
China
100

Brazil

2

medical exemptions. 
And strict rules may even harden anti-
vaccination attitudes. Australia had previ-
ously made exemption conditional on
speaking to a doctor or nurse about the
beneﬁts of vaccines. The new rules mean
fewer chances to change parents’ minds.
Research suggests that making it harder to
avoid the most important vaccines may
make it more likely that people who
strongly oppose vaccination in general
shun optional ones, says Cornelia Betsch
of the University of Erfurt.
More important, say public-health ex-
perts, is to boost conﬁdence in the safety of
vaccines and trust in the authorities that
recommend them—both badly damaged
in many European countries by past
public-health mis-steps, such as a scandal
with contaminated blood supply in France
from the late 1990s. The best way to handle
a vaccine scare is to express empathy and
promptly share the results from investiga-
tions of alleged adverse reactions, says
Heidi Larson of the London School of Hy-
giene and Tropical Medicine. British au-
thorities’ dismissive response to the MMR
scare failed to reassure worried parents.

%

,

e

t

a

r

n
o

i
t

a
n

i

c
c

a

v

t

n
a

f

n

I

France

Cyprus

Italy

Denmark
Br itain

United States

Sudan

Burundi
90

80

70

60

0

10,000

20,000

30,000

40,000
50,000
GDP per person*, $

60,000

70,000

80,000

Sources: WHO; World Bank

*At purchasing-power par ity

 
Business

Digital advertising

Invisible ads, phantom readers

N EW Y O R K

that are tracking his online activities. The
auction is held, and the “winning” ad
transmitted, within milliseconds. The idea
is to help publishers get the best price for
their slots and advertisers the best return
on their investment.
The trading of online ad slots is as com-
plex as it is ﬁendishly fast. Thousands of
ﬁrms jostle to analyse consumer data and
buy, sell and monitor ads. Middlemen re-
package “inventory” (as ad slots are
known in the business), then sell it to other
middlemen. An ad impression sold pro-
grammatically can change hands 15 times
before ﬁnally being bought by an advertis-
er, notes Peter Stabler, an analyst at Wells
Fargo, a bank. “We have an immature sup-
ply chain that is constantly evolving,” says

Worries about fraud and fragmentation may prompt a shake-out in the crowded
online-ad industry
THIS year, for the ﬁrst time, advertisers
in America may spend more online
than on television. Worldwide, online ads
may surpass television in 2017, predicts the
forecasting unit of Interpublic, a giant ad
agency. Digital advertisers’ ambitions bor-
der on the divine. They are omnipresent,
nestling their ads in news sites, search re-
sults and Instagram feeds. They are in-
creasingly omniscient: no longer do adver-
tisers know just general things about
you—a worldly professional, say, with su-
perb taste in journalism—but they target
you, speciﬁcally. Omnipotence, however,
is proving harder to achieve. 
The industry has not so much a supply
chain as a tangle. More than 2,500 compa-
nies are involved in the supply of digital
ads, according to Luma Partners, an invest-
ment bank. Marketers worry that their ads
will linger unseen in obscure slots or
worse, be served to robots posing as hu-
man consumers. Meanwhile millions of
real ones, fed up with online ads, want to
block them. Among investors, enthusiasm
for “ad tech” has waned. Digital advertis-
ing’s woes are not existential. Spending
will continue to grow. But the current tur-
moil is likely to reshape the industry. 
“Programmatic”, or automated, buying
and selling of ad slots was supposed to
make advertising online simpler, and in
many ways it has. Advertisers bid for space
on a webpage that a consumer has just
clicked on, based on cookies and other tags

Global adver tising spending, % of total

Digital dominance

Source: Magna Global, IPG Mediabrands

Newspapers

Magazines

50

40

30

20

10

0

2000

05

Television

10

15

20

F ’ C A S T

Digital

Radio

Outdoor

The Economist March 26th 2016 55

Also in this section

56 Ad-blocking on smartphones

57 Upgrading Taiwan’s electronics ﬁrms

57 Brazil’s booming pulp mills

58 Indonesia welcomes power ﬁrms

59 T V channels for stingy millennials

60 Schumpeter: Andy Grove

For daily coverage of business, visit

Economist.com/business-ﬁnance 

Randall Rothenberg of the Interactive Ad-
vertising Bureau (IAB), which represents
media and ad-tech ﬁrms. That brings both
innovation, he argues, and headaches. 
Some problems are more easily ﬁxed
than others. In recent years the various
participants in the industry have bickered
over “viewability”: webpages are usually
bigger than the screens they are viewed on,
so if a reader sees only part of an ad on his
screen, for a fraction of a second, how
much should the advertiser pay? The Me-
dia Rating Council (MRC), which sets the
rules for audience measurement, now con-
siders a display ad “viewable” if a consum-
er can see half of it for at least one second.
Videos must be seen for two seconds. 
But
some advertisers want more.
GroupM, a buyer of ad slots on behalf of
consumer brands, considers an ad view-
able only if the consumer can see all of it.
Consumers must play at least half a video
with the sound on. The MRC is still work-
ing on standards for ads on mobile phones. 
On the whole, however, the debate
over viewability points to online advertis-
ing’s promise, not its failings. It is impossi-
ble to know if a television viewer has gone
to the bathroom during the commercials
or if a Vogue reader skips a particular page
of ads. Online, marketers have at least
some means of tracking who saw what,
the better to understand which ads work. 
Fraud is a peskier problem. Bad actors
hide within advertising’s supply chain, un-
leashing robots to “see” ads and suck mon-
ey from advertisers. The subtly titled Trust-
worthy Accountability Group, backed by
the industry’s trade associations, wants to
create a registry of vetted online-ad ﬁrms
and use special identiﬁers to track which
ﬁrms get paid for each impression, the bet-
ter to trace problems as they arise. AppNex-
us, which runs a big ad exchange, ﬁlters out
ad slots that seem to be attracting lots of

1

56 Business

Ad nauseam

Global digital ad-blocking

Monthly active users, m

Mobile advertising

Shine, but not rise

The Economist March 26th 2016

200

160

120

80

40

0

2

2009 10

11

12

13

14

15

Source: PageFair

fake “readers”, oﬀers rebates to advertisers
which detect bot fraud and has cut the
number of ad impressions sold by middle-
men. Such steps will lower fraud, not ban-
ish it. The Association of National Adver-
tisers reckons fake impressions will cost its
members more than $7 billion this year. 
An even thornier challenge is the grow-
ing number of consumers blocking ads al-
together (see chart). Some consider it
creepy to be watched so closely. Third-
party tags can be messengers for malware.
Ads drain smartphones’ batteries and their
users’ data plans. Tags to track viewability
and bots make such things worse. 
Little wonder, then, that AdBlock Plus, a
popular tool, has been downloaded more
than 500m times. The company keeps a list
of ads it deems tolerable, and thus lets
through. Sites with lots of ads, such as Goo-
gle, pay a fee to be on the list. AdBlock Plus
says this is proper, as the paying ﬁrms must
still oﬀer palatable ads. Critics, including
the IAB, call it extortion. 
Ad-blockers are most troubling for pub-
lishers, which rely on advertising revenue.
But brands have reason to fret, too, if they
cannot reach consumers online. The IAB is
urging them to make advertisements less
irksome, so that consumers are less in-
clined to block them. The Washington Post
is one of many companies hoping that “na-
tive” ads, which mimic the paper’s editori-
al style, will be less annoying. But the com-
pany is also speeding page-load times and
testing various dummy ads to see which
types consumers dislike least. As these ex-
periments continue, ad-blocking will im-
pose broad costs on publishers, estimated
by Wells Fargo at $4.6 billion in America
and $12.5 billion globally this year. 

A secular shift
All these problems may just be inevitable
teething troubles. “We haven’t had this
kind of transformation since television
came in the late ‘40s and early ‘50s,” says
Marc Pritchard, the marketing boss at Proc-
ter & Gamble, the world’s largest advertis-
er. Grappling with these challenges, how-
ever, may spur a shift in the industry’s
structure. There will always be startups,

Ad-blocking may not quickly spread to smartphones
AD-BLOCKING is becoming ever more
popular on personal computers.
According to some estimates, in a few
countries more than a third of internet
users now have the necessary software
installed in their browsers. But what has
advertisers and publishers really worried
is that ad-blocking could soon make a
dent in the more rapidly growing market
for ads on smartphones, which will reach
$100 billion this year globally, according
to eMarketer, a data provider.
On the face of it, such fears are indeed
warranted. Mobile browsers which block
ads on web pages (though not in apps)
have become more popular, particularly
in Asia. The operating system for Apple’s
iPhones now lets users download ad-
blocking software. Most importantly, last
month Three, a big mobile operator,
announced that it is planning to install
ad-blocking technology in its British and
Italian networks. Its customers will be
able to use it to block ads within apps,
too. Other carriers have said that they are
looking into oﬀering such a service.
Digicel, which is based in Jamaica, is
already doing so.
But on closer inspection, it is too soon
to write the obituary of mobile advertis-
ing, says Dean Bubley, a telecoms consul-
tant. More than half the time, smart-
phone users connect to the internet using
Wi-Fi, so they will still get ads even if
their mobile operator blocks them. What
is more, the fastest-growing sort of mo-
bile advertising is “native”, meaning
indistinguishable from other types of

content, and sometimes even encrypted.
That makes network-based blocking
hard, if not impossible.
Then there are legal and commercial
hurdles. Three is planning to let subscrib-
ers opt into its ad-blocking service, which
is based on technology developed by
Shine, an Israeli startup. But that may still
run afoul of “network neutrality” rules,
which require that all sorts of online
traﬃc, including ads, should be treated
equally. To be on the safe side, the service
is likely to be oﬀered directly through
Shine. Three has given itself a few
months to ﬁgure it all out. Other carriers
are likely to wait and see how Three’s
ad-blocking eﬀorts fare.
Given all this, mobile ad-blocking
may not grow much beyond its current
level in the short term. Online publishers
interviewed by Joseph Evans of Enders
Analysis, a consulting ﬁrm, report that
only a few percent of all ads are getting
blocked. Even some consumers with
ad-blockers installed on their phones
may still be choosing to let some through.
Yet advertisers and publishers should
not get their hopes up too high. The frus-
tration with mobile ads is growing, and
not just because they can annoy. An
increasing worry is privacy: mobile ads
are targeted using lots of personal data,
but it often remains unclear how they are
being collected and used. If the advertis-
ing industry doesn’t clean up its act,
ad-blocking on smartphones may yet
grow, albeit slowly, to become as wide-
spread as it is on personal computers.

particularly because technology changes
so quickly. But on the whole, power is like-
ly to move to fewer, larger companies. 
Rob Norman, GroupM’s chief digital of-
ﬁcer, expects advertisers to continue shift-
ing towards large platforms such as Google
and Facebook, and a select group of ﬁrms
that agree to stricter standards on viewabil-
ity. Brands’ concern about fraud and frag-
mentation may help simplify the supply
chain. Some brand owners, such as Procter
& Gamble, control their own programmat-
ic buying. 
Others are pruning the number of other
ﬁrms they deal with. “We would always
prefer fewer partners,” says Jamie Moldaf-
sky, chief marketing oﬃcer for Wells Fargo.
A variety of larger companies such as Ya-
hoo, Oracle and Salesforce have bought up
smaller ﬁrms, the better to oﬀer them-
selves as one-stop shops to advertisers. 
The best positioned ﬁrms, however, are

Google and Facebook. Terence Kawaja,
Luma’s founder, notes that the two compa-
nies have more than half of the mobile-ad-
vertising market, a share he expects to rise.
Thanks to logins, each can track consumers
from their computers to their phones and
back again. Each has a broad, ever-expand-
ing suite of services. On March 15th Google
unveiled new tools, including one to man-
age data on customers. 
Rivals are worried. TubeMogul, a pro-
vider of ad-buying software, has a new ad-
vertising campaign claiming that Google
has excessive power. This is in part to de-
fend its own interests—TubeMogul’s criti-
cisms include Google’s decision to limit
the ways by which brands can buy ad
space on its YouTube video service. But it is
not unreasonable to worry that the pres-
sures to rationalise the fragmented on-
line-ad industry might eventually push it
too far in the other direction. 7

The Economist March 26th 2016

Business 57

the mainland’s BOE and China Star Opto-
electronics. Whereas Taiwan’s total ex-
ports fell by 12% year on year in February,
display screens and other “optical instru-
ments” plunged by 34%.
Of all the countries dependent on pur-
chases by China, Taiwan has most to lose
as the mainland’s electronics industry be-
comes more self-suﬃcient, says Angela
Hsieh, an economist at Barclays, a bank.
South Korea also depends on China, but its
ﬁrms sell a wider variety of goods there,
such as cars and cosmetics.
Becoming more innovative is easier for
some than others. Hon Hai, which has its
eye on Sharp’s research into advanced
OLED display screens, is big enough to ab-
sorb the struggling Japanese ﬁrm, and to
keep throwing money at developing its
technology. Likewise, South Korean ﬁrms
such as Samsung Electronics, which be-
long to giant conglomerates, can aﬀord the
R&D and marketing budgets needed to re-
main globally competitive. But many of
Taiwan’s electronics ﬁrms are, thus far at
least, small, anonymous links in other
companies’ supply chains.
Starting to sell gadgets under their own
brands might oﬀer these ﬁrms far higher
proﬁt margins, allowing them to pull
themselves up by their bootstraps. But past
experience shows that it is hard to do this
without going into competition with the
more famous customers that they rely on.
Some Taiwanese ﬁrms, including HTC and
Asus, have produced branded products—
such as phones and notebook computers—
only to be deserted by the customers to
whom they sell components.
Raymond Hsu, an analyst with Taiwan
Ratings, an aﬃliate of Standard and Poor’s,
thinks Hon Hai would only try to make
money from Sharp’s brand if it could at-
tach it to products that wouldn’t upset its
existing customers. The Taiwanese ﬁrm
may be more interested, in the short term,
in being able to oﬀer brand-owners like
Apple a wider range of components, and
thus to increase its bargaining-power with
them. Mr Hsu says Apple would prefer not
to buy OLED displays from Samsung,
which is a rival producer of smartphones.
Taiwan’s president-elect, Tsai Ing-wen,
has promised to reshape its economy by
“shifting from an eﬃciency-driven model
to an innovation-driven one.” Ms Tsai also
wants to reduce reliance on China and pro-
mote greater technology ties with America
and Japan. The question is how. Taiwanese
ﬁrms have already been encouraged by the
outgoing government to ﬂirt with the likes
of cloud computing, the “internet of
things”, 3D printing, biotechnology and re-
newable energy. Some are showing poten-
tial, but there will be no quick ﬁxes. Mean-
while, prospering rivals on the mainland
enjoy the beneﬁts of a vast home market,
and a government with lots more money
to throw around. 7

Pulp producers in Brazil

Money that grows
on trees

T R Ê S L A G O A S , M A T O G R O S S O D O S U L

Brazil’s economy is crumbling but its
giant pulp ﬁrms are booming
LOOK north from atop the 120-metre (390-
foot) bleaching tower at the Horizonte 1
pulp mill, and all you see is plantations of
tall, slender eucalyptus trees. They stretch
from the factory gate, across the gentle un-
dulations of Mato Grosso do Sul, a state in
Brazil’s centre-west, all the way to the hori-
zon. “That’s our competitive advantage,”
explains Alexandre Figueiredo, who is in
charge of production at the plant. Its own-
er, Fibria, is the world’s biggest producer of
“short-ﬁbre” cellulose pulp, which is used
to make such things as newsprint, nappies
and banknotes. (“Long-ﬁbre” is used for
high-grade paper and packaging.)
As its name suggests, Mato Grosso do
Sul (roughly, “southern thick bush” in Por-
tuguese) has vast expanses of cerrado, or
tropical savannah, a chunk of which was
long ago turned into farmland, some of
which has more recently been planted
with eucalyptus. Most of Fibria’s 568,000
hectares of plantations lie within 200km
of its mills. Eldorado, a rival with a mill on
the other side of Três Lagoas (a city of
115,000 that is fast becoming Brazil’s cellu-
lose cluster), needs its lorries to drive only a
bit farther. No other ﬁrm in the world has
such ready access to its raw material. Add
the balmy climate and rich soils of Brazil’s
south and centre-west—where, as Joe Bor-
mann of Fitch, a credit-rating agency, puts
it, eucalyptus “grows like a weed”—and it is
easy to see how Brazil has conquered 40%
of the global short-ﬁbre market.
Investment in technology is paying oﬀ,
too. In the late 1990s Brazilians introduced
a fast-growing eucalyptus variety that can
be harvested after just seven years, com-
pared with the two decades or more it
takes to grow pine, the main source of cel-

1

Placid pulp

Commodity pr ices and Brazilian real

Januar y 1st 2012=100

Soyabeans

Oil

Cellulose

Sugar

Brazilian real
against $

Iron ore

2012

13

14

15

16

Source: Thomson Reuters

160

140

120

100

80

60

40

20

Electronics

Taiwan 2 .0

T A I P E I

The island’s electronics ﬁrms are in
need of an upgrade
THE takeover bid by Hon Hai of Taiwan
for Sharp, a chronically loss-making
Japanese electronics ﬁrm, is being watched
closely as a test of Japan’s openness to for-
eign investment. But it is also being scruti-
nised back in Taiwan. The deal may yet fal-
ter: as The Economist went to press, Hon
Hai was reportedly seeking to knock
around $900m oﬀ its earlier oﬀer of $5.4
billion including assumed debt. But if it
does go ahead, and Terry Gou, Hon Hai’s
boss, succeeds in absorbing Sharp’s brand
and technology, he will be able to oﬀer his
big customers, such as Apple, a broader ar-
ray of parts, and may even transform his
ﬁrm into a seller of innovative consumer
goods. The deal could serve as a model for
other Taiwanese electronics ﬁrms which
want to go global, says the island’s eco-
nomics minister, John Deng.
Electronics ﬁrms together contribute
40% of Taiwanese exports, and 15% of its
GDP. For more than two decades they have
achieved great success assembling com-
puters and other gadgets for Western com-
panies. At ﬁrst their factories were all in Tai-
wan, but as China opened up, they shifted
some to the mainland. The combination of
Taiwanese production expertise and the
mainland’s cheap labour was hard to beat. 
Now, however, this cross-strait partner-
ship is giving way to competition. Taiwan-
ese ﬁrms fear that rising mainland counter-
parts, which they call the “red supply
chain”, are catching up. Taiwan’s semicon-
ductor ﬁrms, such as TSMC, are so far going
strong. But its main makers of big display
screens, Innolux (which Hon Hai controls)
and AU Optronics, are under threat from

58 Business

2

lulose pulp in the northern hemisphere.
Next door to Horizonte 1, Fibria is building
a high-tech nursery with technology de-
vised by Dutch ﬂower growers. Eldorado
pioneered the use of drones to map the to-
pography of its woods and optimise plant-
ing and harvesting. 
Pulp producers are also thriving thanks
to the storm that is sucking life out of much
of the rest of Brazil’s economy. From his
vantage-point, Mr Figueiredo waves to-
wards the only clearing in the arboreal
landscape: an unﬁnished Petrobras fertil-
iser plant a few kilometres away. Construc-
tion stopped in 2014, when the state-con-
trolled oil giant emerged as the locus of a
multibillion-dollar bribery scandal that
may yet topple Brazil’s government (see
page 44). That is in stark contrast to the fre-
netic activity directly below him, where a
second, 8.7 billion reais ($2.4 billion) pro-
duction line is taking shape that will more
than double Horizonte 1’s current annual
capacity of 1.3m tonnes, once it is complet-
ed in late 2017. 
Recession and political upheaval have
brought Brazil’s currency, the real, down by
three-ﬁfths against the dollar since 2011.
That is a boon to pulp producers, who ex-
port nearly all their output. Standard &
Poor’s, another rating agency, reckons that
production costs in dollars dropped by $50
per tonne in 2015; another $40 per tonne
was saved on maintaining mills. UBS, a
bank, calculates that for every 10-centavo
decline against the greenback, Brazilian
producers’ earnings rise by $15 per tonne. 
As the real has tumbled, global pulp
prices have held steady, whereas some of
the other commodities Brazil produces
have slumped (see chart, previous page).
As it rebalances from investment to con-
sumption, China may build fewer bridges,
hurting Brazilian iron-ore exports. But the
Chinese are buying more bog roll; and over
40% of Brazilian pulp producers’ output is
turned into tissue for the Chinese market.
Between 2013 and 2023 annual toilet-paper
sales will grow by 7.4m tonnes, with China
accounting for nearly half of the rise, ac-
cording to RISI, a consulting ﬁrm. 
The combination of a cheap currency
and healthy demand has pushed Brazilian
producers’ margins to mouth-watering lev-
els. Fibria’s rose to 53%, on record revenues
of 10.1 billion reais, last year. With earnings
equal to 75% of revenues in the fourth
quarter of 2015, Eldorado’s margins set an
all-time industry high. This helped ease its
debt burden, which remains large com-
pared with rivals’. Klabin and Suzano, two
other big Brazilian ﬁrms, also had a good
year, even if, as integrated producers of
both pulp and its products, their mostly
domestic papermaking businesses suf-
fered in line with Brazil’s economy.
Can it last? Overcapacity is one worry.
Last May CMPC, a Chilean concern, ﬁred
up a plant in Rio Grande do Sul state in

The Economist March 26th 2016

ly. And the real has recently begun to pick
up, as markets bet on a change of govern-
ment and thus an end to Brazil’s political
and economic paralysis.
Brazilian pulp bosses nevertheless
seem chipper. If pulp prices fall, older,
high-cost producers, mainly in the north-
ern hemisphere, may go out of business,
reducing any excess capacity. In the long
run, demand for tissue can only grow. As
Marcelo Castelli, Fibria’s boss, observes,
the average Chinese still uses just over 5kg
of it a year; in developed countries the ﬁg-
ure is 10-20kg. 
As for the currency, Eldorado’s boss,
José Carlos Grubisich, notes that the indus-
try survived a rate of 1.6 reais to the dollar
ﬁve years ago. With the exchange rate now
around 3.6, there is a long way to go before
it begins to hurt. Even the rich world’s fall-
ing demand for printing and writing paper
is not such a worry: it means there is less
used paper for recycling, which should in
turn shore up demand for “primary” pulp.
Though Brazil’s pulp industry is boom-
ing, it is on the lookout for new uses for its
eucalyptus timber, from biofuels to green
substitutes for plastics. In the past few
years Fibria has bought stakes in several
startups with promising technology, in-
cluding one in Canada. It is sizing up two
more. “Money can grow on trees,” Mr Cas-
telli promises. “It just takes time.” 7

The margins are high too

southern Brazil that will churn out 1.3m
tonnes of pulp a year. This month Klabin
produced the ﬁrst bales at a 1.5m-tonne
plant in nearby Paraná state. Eldorado is
breaking ground on its own expansion
project in Três Lagoas, which could add an-
other 2.3m tonnes to annual output. And
that is just Brazil. Global capacity is poised
to grow by 2.7m tonnes this year alone, esti-
mates UBS; demand by just 1.5m tonnes.
That will surely weigh on prices eventual-

Power stations in Indonesia

Shock therapy

S I N G A P O R E

This increase is comparable to the total in-
stalled capacity of countries such as Swe-
den and South Africa, and would mean al-
most doubling Indonesia’s power output.
Such a scheme will require a huge ex-
pansion in the role of private-sector power
ﬁrms. 
Independent power producers
(IPPs) presently generate around 20% of In-
donesia’s electricity; the rest is churned out

Plans for breakneck electriﬁcation mean opportunities for foreign ﬁrms
AFLOTILLA of ﬂoating power stations is
supposed soon to traverse the vast wa-
ters of eastern Indonesia. The ships, burn-
ing marine oil and leased from a Turkish
ﬁrm, will be a temporary ﬁx for the sprawl-
ing archipelago’s rising thirst for power. In-
donesia consumes about half as much
electricity as Britain, despite being four
times as populous; about 50m Indone-
sians have no mains power at all. Short-
ages will grow more pressing as the coun-
try’s middle class expands: over the next
decade or so, electricity demand is expect-
ed to rise by nearly 9% a year. 
Putting a stop to blackouts is a priority
for the government. Last May President
Joko Widodo announced an ambition to
build more than 100 new power stations in
ﬁve years (as part of an even bigger scheme
to revamp the country’s creaking infra-
structure). That plan, combined with work
still hanging around from an earlier electri-
ﬁcation drive, calls for about 43GW of new
generating capacity to be added to the grid.

Electr icity consumption per person
MWh, 2013

Watt a difference

Malaysia

Thailand

Vietnam

Philippines

Singapore

Source: IEA

0

2

4

6

8

10

Indonesia

1

2

The Economist March 26th 2016

by PLN, the state utility. Indonesia hopes
they will build and operate most of the
new power stations and that their home
countries’ banks may ﬁnance them. Inde-
pendents
could eventually
provide
around half of the country’s juice.
Foreign power ﬁrms were once keen on
Indonesia. Many ﬂed during the Asian ﬁ-
nancial crisis in the late 1990s, and those
that remained were forced to sell their
power far cheaper than they had planned
to. Lately, conﬁdence has returned, encour-
aged by liberalising legislation and the
new government’s ambitions. India and
China also have gargantuan electriﬁcation
drives, but in Indonesia a paucity of local
expertise means it oﬀers a greater opportu-
nity for foreign builders and operators of
power stations. 
So far, ﬁrms from elsewhere in Asia
have been keenest. One of the ﬁrst big pro-
jects, a $2 billion power station in West
Java, will be built by a consortium includ-
ing Chubu Electric and Marubeni of Japan,
and Komipo and Samtan of South Korea.
Chinese companies are taking a leading
role, despite a perception that some of the
power stations China previously built in
Indonesia were not entirely up to snuﬀ.
American and European utilities, for their
part, are hanging back. Engie, formerly
known as GDF Suez, a French ﬁrm with a
long history in South-East Asia, has just
sold its stake in one of Indonesia’s biggest
power projects to Nebras of Qatar, as part
of a global withdrawal from coal (though it
remains keen on Indonesia’s promising
but poorly-developed geothermal sector).
Traps abound. Acquiring land—a head-
ache 
for
infrastructure-builders
any-
where—is particularly tricky in Indonesia,
says Lenita Tobing of PwC, a consulting
ﬁrm. The construction of what is supposed
to be South-East Asia’s largest power sta-
tion, a 2GW coal plant in Java backed by an
Indonesian ﬁrm and two Japanese ones,
J-Power and Itochu, is running four years
late after scores of locals refused to sell
their farms. Meanwhile, Indonesia’s trans-
mission and distribution network, run by
PLN (which remains the monopoly buyer
of electric power), will need beeﬁng up
enormously, with ﬁnancing from multilat-
erals like the Asian Development Bank
(ADB), if it is to transport all the energy the
proposed power stations will produce.
Mr Widodo’s administration is eager to
help. It has created a “one-stop shop” to
help foreign investors short-circuit Indone-
sia’s tortuous bureaucracy. Oﬃcials say
they have cut the time it takes power ﬁrms
to obtain permits from two-and-a-half
years to about eight months. A new land-
acquisition law, which came into force last
year, may speed up negotiations; so will a
recent presidential decree, says Agung Wi-
caksono, an energy-ministry oﬃcial. Yet
strong backing from Jakarta does not guar-
antee deference from provincial authori-

Television

Changing the channel

N EW Y O R K

Business 59

A startup seeks to keep the conventional TV station alive in the digital era
THE received wisdom of the on-de-
mand era of television is that people,
young ones especially, want to watch
their favourite shows anytime, anywhere
and on any device; the “linear” viewing
of a succession of programmes chosen by
a TV station will fade, as viewers dine à la
carte from Netﬂix, Amazon and Hulu.
The wisdom is not entirely wrong, but
what if young consumers were oﬀered
channels more attuned to their tastes?
Pluto.tv, a three-year-old American
startup, oﬀers free television over the
internet on the assumption that many
viewers are still couch potatoes at heart:
they want to sit back and watch whatever
happens to be on the telly. The ﬁrm has
developed more than 100 channels,
curated by humans with guidance from
data (and the occasional hunch) on what
people like to watch. Among the oﬀerings
are “Classic Toons TV”, “News 24/7”,
“Cats 24/7”, an all-Beyoncé pop channel
and another that plays nothing but Kung
Fu movies. Sky, an early investor along
with Universal Music Group, also

streams its news channel on the service.
Pluto splits advertising revenue with its
content partners.
This might seem a challenging busi-
ness model, given the direction of travel
in televised entertainment. Not only do
viewers increasingly want to consume
shows on demand, they also want to skip
the ads. The Boston Consulting Group
(BCG) projects that such “non-linear”
television-watching in America will
double to 40% of all viewing by 2018.
Tech giants with huge user bases—
Amazon and Google—are streaming
video and commissioning original
shows, and Apple may soon join them.
As for the cable ﬁrms, they still enjoy an
advantage in that many customers have
to rely on them for their broadband-
internet service.
But there is one crack in these formi-
dable content platforms that a niche
service could exploit. They cost money,
and millennials are said to hate paying
for stuﬀ. Cable in particular is coming to
be seen as too pricey. There is a lot of
waste in their expensive pay-TV pack-
ages, says Ken Parks, Pluto’s executive
chairman and a former executive at
Spotify, a music-streaming service. The
cable giants’ bundles of channels include
many that viewers will never watch, and
their cost can exceed $150 a month. BCG
estimates that the number of pay-TV
subscriptions in America has just about
peaked and will decline substantially,
albeit gradually.
Until the next generation of mobile
technology, “5G”, arrives, bringing light-
ning-fast wireless-broadband speeds,
many consumers will still have to hand
over some money to the cable guys for
their internet access. But Pluto (which
does not yet release ﬁnancial results) says
it already has more than 2m people view-
ing its channels at least once a month.
About 40% of those are aged 18-34. The
service plans to add a premium, paid-for
tier, but for now Mr Parks is banking on
frugal young couch potatoes.

Now, which channel is Hipster T V on?

ties, which under Indonesia’s political sys-
tem enjoy great autonomy. 
Some people fret that the scheme could
fall victim to its own ambition. Indonesia’s
power demands could probably still be
met if the new power stations were added
over ten years rather than hurried through
in ﬁve, reckons Pradeep Tharakan of the
ADB. The presidency may be imposing a
tight deadline in the belief that unless it

creates a sense of urgency, nothing will get
done. Most in the business doubt that the
electriﬁcation drive will be completed on
schedule. Nevertheless, all the whip-crack-
ing has some observers worrying that
quality will be sacriﬁced for speed—and
has some IPPs wondering if bits of the
country might even end up temporarily
with an excess of capacity. Indonesians
should be so lucky.  7

60 Business

The Economist March 26th 2016

Schumpeter

The man who put Intel inside

Andy Grove, who died on March 21st, was at the heart of the computer revolution

chip doubles roughly every two years. Companies had to run at
top speed just to stay in the same place. A succession of compet-
itors in Japan, South Korea and China tried to topple Intel. During
Mr Grove’s 37-year career there the company courted disaster on
several occasions: in the early 1980s, for example, he introduced
an advanced chip, the iAPX 432 microprocessor, that was sup-
posed to reshape the industry’s future but turned out to be far
slower than its competitors. But he had a genius for coming back
stronger than ever. He masterminded Intel’s switch from memo-
ry chips to microprocessors and, with Bill Gates, established the
“Wintel” monopoly in personal computers, in which Intel’s pro-
cessors and Microsoft’s Windows operating system became an
unbeatable combination. 
Mr Grove achieved all this by embracing management meth-
ods that are now so common that they pass without comment,
but were then strikingly new. He attacked corporate hierarchy
and devolved power to front-line workers. He combined this
with an obsession for measurement and performance-related re-
wards: top performers got juicy stock options; and weak perform-
ers were shown the door. Under the slogan “Intel inside”, he en-
sured that the ﬁrm’s processors became branded goods, not
commodities. Under his leadership it increased annual revenues
from $1.9 billion to more than $26 billion and made millionaires
of hundreds of employees. 
His career is a testimony to the wisdom of America’s liberal
immigration policy. He could hardly have had a worse start in
life—he was born into a Jewish family in Budapest in 1936 and
managed to survive both the Holocaust and then the Hungarian
Communist Party. A childhood bout of scarlet fever left him al-
most deaf. (His hearing was corrected in middle age after several
operations.) He ﬂed to America in 1956 when the Soviets invaded
his homeland, Anglicised his name from Andras Grof, and en-
rolled in the City College of New York, which was then both free
and meritocratic. He graduated at the top of his class in chemical
engineering, despite struggling with poor English and impaired
hearing; then took a PhD in the same subject at the University of
California, Berkeley. He claimed that he moved to California be-
cause he hated eastern winters but his quest for sun also put him
at the heart of a new industrial revolution. 

A drunken rat in 1960s Berkeley
Mr Grove’s career is also a testimony to America’s ability to spot
merit even if it comes in the oddest of packages. Grove was not an
obvious catch in 1963. He then spoke with a strong Hungarian ac-
cent. He adopted the manners of a resident of radical, mid-1960s
Berkeley. By his own admission he was a “hotheaded 30-year-old
running around like a drunken rat.” But Mr Moore saw the genius
behind the quirky persona. For decades the Intel Trinity—Messrs
Grove, Moore and Noyce—drove the semiconductor revolution
in large part because they were such diﬀerent people united only
by a respect for raw IQ. Noyce was a visionary. Mr Moore was a
technological virtuoso. Mr Grove was also a technologist but, to
the surprise of many who knew him, he turned himself into a
management genius, supplying Intel with drive and discipline
and turning it round when it got into trouble. 
America was good to the young Andy Grove, providing him
with a refuge from totalitarianism and then a ﬁrst-class educa-
tion. In return Andy Grove was good for America, by helping it to
remain at the very heart of the semiconductor revolution. His
career was a parable as well as a triumph. 7

IN HIS book, “Giants of Enterprise”, Richard Tedlow of Harvard
Business School argues that America has an extraordinary abil-
ity to produce business titans. Italy produces a disproportionate
number of great opera composers, he writes, and Russia an abun-
dance of great novelists. America’s unique genius lies in nurtur-
ing business heroes. Whether this remains true in the future as
American capitalism becomes mired in red tape, protectionist
pressure mounts, and business dynamism shifts to the emerging
world, is open to debate. But Andy Grove certainly stood square-
ly in this great tradition.
Just as Andrew Carnegie helped to usher in the steel age and
John D. Rockefeller the oil age, Mr Grove, Intel’s former boss, who
died this week, helped to bring about the computer age. And just
as Carnegie and Rockefeller worked their magic by building orga-
nisations rather than inventing new products, Mr Grove, though
a brilliant technologist, worked his by building Intel from a start-
up into the world’s dominant semiconductor ﬁrm. Like Carnegie
and Rockefeller, he built huge plants employing thousands; but
whereas they ﬂaunted their wealth and power, Mr Grove la-
boured in a cubicle no diﬀerent from those of his employees. 
Mr Grove’s genius was as an organisation-builder and manag-
er rather than as an innovator. His most obvious quality was his
ﬁerce intelligence. He could be diﬃcult—hot-tempered when con-
fronted with idiocy, prickly when challenged. He believed in the
value of “creative confrontation” (which sometimes meant
screaming matches). His successful management book, pub-
lished in 1996, was called “Only the Paranoid Survive”. Possessed
of a ﬁerce work ethic, he drove his subordinates as hard as he
drove himself. But this combination of characteristics was exact-
ly what was needed in the infant semiconductor industry. He
joined Intel in 1968 as its ﬁrst employee, after it was founded by
Robert Noyce and Gordon Moore. He became Intel’s president in
1979, its CEO in 1987 and, when he stepped down from the CEO
job in 1998, having earlier been diagnosed with prostate cancer,
he remained its chairman until 2005.
The semiconductor industry, then as now, was deﬁned by in-
credibly rapid change. Mr Moore suggested (ﬁrst partly in jest and
then in seriousness) that the industry was governed by a law
whereby the number of components that can be crammed onto a

Finance and economics

The Economist March 26th 2016 61

Also in this section

62 Buttonwood: Inequality v auster ity

63 Investing in South Korea

63 India battles its addiction to gold

64 Kenya’s wilting coﬀee industr y

67 China’s fudged economic data

67 The peer-to-peer backlash

68 Free exchange: Global ﬁnancial
movements humble the Fed

For daily analysis and debate on economics, visit

Economist.com/economics

visers, says, “Now the tide has gone out
and the emperor has no clothes.”
That may help explain some big recent
withdrawals (see chart). Actively managed
funds in America saw outﬂows of more
than $100 billion last year, even as $400
billion ﬂowed into “passive” funds that
aim simply to track an index, according to
Morningstar. It did not help that resource-
rich countries hit by falling commodity
prices sold assets owned by their sover-
eign-wealth funds to compensate for lost
revenue. Firms that specialise in emerging-
market equities did especially badly, with
Aberdeen suﬀering an outﬂow of 14% and
Ashmore 19%.
Regulation and technology are adding
to the challenges for incumbents. In the
wake of the ﬁnancial crisis, regulators fo-
cused on the banks. Now they are looking
at asset managers, with everything from
the transparency of their fees to the liquid-
ity of their investments under the spot-
light. In America, the Department of La-
bour plans to introduce rules later this year
obliging most ﬁnancial professionals to
suggest investments that are not just “suit-
able”, as current regulation has it, but “in
the best interest” of customers. That will
make it diﬃcult to recommend invest-
ments in funds which pay the advisers a
commission. A similar reform took eﬀect in
Britain in 2013. Account statements will
also tell customers how much they are
paying in fees. 
Such rules will have a big impact on
business models. A greater number of
wealthy investors will start choosing their
own funds, which should beneﬁt online
retail platforms, predicts Pricewaterhouse-
Coopers, an accountancy ﬁrm. Advisers
will no longer have an incentive to push
expensive products of dubious merit,
which should boost
low-cost products
such as passive funds.

1

Asset managers

The tide turns 

N ew Y o r k

Consumers are ﬁnally revolting against an outdated industry
FOR decades looking after other people’s
money has been a lucrative business.
Proﬁt margins in the asset-management in-
dustry were 39% in 2014, according to BCG,
a consultancy, compared with 8% in con-
sumer goods and 20% in pharmaceuticals.
The industry’s global proﬁts in 2014 were
an estimated $102 billion, allowing ﬁrms to
pay those picking stocks in the American
equity market an average salary of around
$690,000 a year. Better yet, asset-manage-
ment is growing fast: the industry looks
after $78 trillion worldwide, and could
shepherd over $100 trillion by 2020.
Yet the outlook for many asset manag-
ers is grim. The industry is being reshaped
by low-cost competition. At the same time
falling markets are shrinking assets under
management, and thus fees levied as a per-
centage of those assets. Regulators, mean-
while, are trying to prevent consumers
from being sold inappropriate products,
which are often the most lucrative.
The biggest challenge confronts so-
called active managers, who promise to
earn returns that are higher than the mar-
ket benchmark (the S&P 500, for example)
by picking investments judiciously. Very
few manage to do so: a study by Standard &
Poor’s, which compiles the S&P 500 index,
among other things, found that 91% of ac-
tive managers in emerging-market equities
failed to beat the relevant index over ten
years, and that 95% of active bond manag-
ers underperformed.

Aberdeen Asset
Aberdeen Asset
Management
Management
Legg Mason

Source: Morningstar

20

15

PIMCO

M&G

Dreyfus

Columbia Threadneedle
Columbia Threadneedle
Investments
Investments
Franklin Templeton
Franklin Templeton

This is hardly surprising: the average
manager is likely to do no better than the
market, before fees. Once fees are sub-
tracted, therefore, active managers are like-
ly to underperform. Morningstar, a data
provider, has found that high fees are in-
deed a predictor of underperformance.

Low blow
When markets are rising, clients may not
notice the impact of fees, protecting asset
managers’ proﬁts. But last year most mar-
kets were ﬂat or lower. McKinsey, a consul-
tancy, says proﬁt margins and growth fell at
the majority of American asset-manage-
ment ﬁrms in 2015. Paul Smith of the CFA
Institute, an association of investment ad-

A giant sucking sound

Net outf lows, global 
asset managers*, 2015, %

Assets under
management
end-2015, $bn

10

5

–

0

396

101

103

187

146

595

219

*With at least $100bn assets
under management

62 Finance and economics

The Economist March 26th 2016

2

Meanwhile, institutional investors are
reducing the number of managers they
deal with. RPMI Railpen, a British pension
fund, has gone from 20 external equity
managers in 2013 to seven today. According
to a survey by State Street, a ﬁnancial-ser-
vices group, four out of ﬁve pension funds
plan to increase in-house asset manage-
ment. Investors are also reconsidering
their exposure to high-charging hedge-
fund and private-equity managers. CAL-
PERS, a big Californian pension fund, has
dumped its hedge-fund managers. PGGM,
which manages Dutch pension money, has
halved what it pays for infrastructure in-

vestments since 2008, mostly by investing
directly. Some pension funds are clubbing
together to negotiate lower fees.
Technology also means that the strat-
egies of active managers can be replicated
at much lower cost. Take value managers,
who claim to be able to beat the market by
picking cheap shares. A computer program
can comb the market for stocks that look
cheap relative to their proﬁts, asset values,
or dividends; investors have no need to
worry that the active manager might lose
focus or change style. When it comes to
choosing between asset markets, robo-ad-
visers, using computer models, can help in-

vestors manage their wealth for a very low
fee. Earlier this month Goldman Sachs, a
big bank, became the latest big ﬁnancial
ﬁrm to buy one.
Fees for active equity funds are falling
slowly, dropping by 4% for retail investors
between 2012 and 2014, according to BCG.
But the competition from passive manag-
ers is intense. Fees on passive equity funds
for retail investors dropped by a ﬁfth over
the same period, as operating costs keep
falling. As a percentage of assets, expenses
at Vanguard, a specialist in tracker funds,
now average 0.18% a year, a ﬁfth of what
they were in 1975.

1

Buttonwood

Tough choices

Depending on Uncle Sam

Propor tion of elderly people’s income from
Social Secur ity in United States, 2012, %

Less than 50%

50%-90%

100

80

60

40

20

0

All

90% and above

Black Hispanic White

Source: Social Secur ity Administration

Asian

State spending will be hard to cut given rising inequality
VOTERS’ anger over inequality is one
explanation for the rise of politicians
as varied as Donald Trump, Bernie Sand-
ers and Marine Le Pen. This anger also
makes it very diﬃcult for the free-market
right to realise one of its key aims: the
shrinking of the state. In Britain a plan to
reduce spending on beneﬁts for the dis-
abled has been sabotaged by the resigna-
tion of a government minister and a back-
bench rebellion. In America mainstream
Republicans are horriﬁed by the rise of Mr
Trump, who does not share their small-
government ideals.
Ideally, conservatives would like peo-
ple to be more self-reliant, owning their
own homes and funding their own retire-
ments. But many people do not have
enough spare income to meet those goals.
One study found that 21% of Americans
lacked a savings account and 62% had less
than $1,000 in their rainy-day funds. Simi-
larly, in Britain, nearly 60% had less than
£1,000 ($1,417) in liquid savings. Many of
those people will have savings in another
form, as part of a workplace pension
scheme. Still, a Federal Reserve study
found that around 31% of Americans had
no private retirement savings at all, in-
cluding nearly a quarter of those aged
over 45.
This leaves people very dependent on
the state. Around 60m Americans cur-
rently receive payments from the Social
Security system. The average retirement
beneﬁt is $16,000 a year. A person with
average earnings who retires at 65 can ex-
pect to receive around 40% of their ﬁnal
salary. More than half of retired people
depend on Social Security for the major-
ity of their income; for more than a third,
it comprises over 90% (see chart). In short,
this is a vital beneﬁt for tens of millions of
Americans, which they would have no
way to replace. No wonder that cutting

Social Security has long been known as
the “third rail” of American politics.
Yet Social Security makes up around a
quarter of all federal spending. Add in
Medicare, a health programme for those
over 65, which cost $546 billion in 2015, and
39% of the budget goes toward beneﬁts for
the elderly. With an ageing population,
these ﬁgures are likely to go up, not down.
Meanwhile, attempts by government to
encourage private saving for pensions
have run into diﬃculties. Tax breaks may
simply prompt workers to shift their sav-
ings from accounts that are more heavily
taxed rather than to increase their savings
overall. And the biggest gainers from tax
shelters tend to be the better-oﬀ, blowing a
hole in government revenues without
helping the poor much.
Pushing up the retirement age would re-
duce the burden a bit. But many workers
leave the jobs market before the oﬃcial re-
tirement age: ﬁgures show that such peo-
ple account for around half of the marked
decline since 2007 in the share of working-
age Americans who are actually in work.
In Europe, many of those who retire before
earning a full pension still get state support

of various kinds, reducing the saving for
governments.
Then there is housing. High prices and
stagnant wages make it harder for young
people to own homes. Figures from the
2011 census showed that the proportion of
British households that were owner-oc-
cupiers had fallen to 64% from 69% in
2001—the ﬁrst decline in that ﬁgure in a
century. The ratio of house prices to the in-
comes of ﬁrst-time buyers in Britain is 5.2,
close to the peak reached in 2007; in Lon-
don, the ratio is a staggering 10.1, well
above previous highs.
Attempts to encourage home owner-
ship via tax breaks, such as the new life-
time individual savings account, may
only push prices even higher. The fastest
way to make prices more aﬀordable
would be a government-backed house-
building programme, something that
would be incompatible with attempts to
cut the budget deﬁcit and shrink the state.
Then there is automation, which may
turn into the big policy challenge of the
coming decades.
Innovations such as
driverless cars may threaten millions of
jobs. Some academics, such as Erik Bryn-
jolfsson and Andrew McAfee of the Mas-
sachusetts Institute of Technology, envi-
sion a two-tier labour market, divided
between workers who complement ma-
chines and those who compete against
them. At the least, this may mean in-
creased government spending on retrain-
ing; it may also mean higher welfare bills.
It could create demand for public-sector
employment to absorb surplus labour.
In short, it is very hard to see how ris-
ing levels of inequality can be squared
with a smaller state. Voters will surely de-
mand that politicians either reduce in-
equality or maintain the safety net.

Economist.com/blogs/buttonwood

The Economist March 26th 2016

2

Retail
investors increasingly choose
one-stop-shops, such as Vanguard. These
investors are buying cheap exchange-
traded funds (tracker funds that trade on
the stockmarket) or all-in-one multi-asset
funds (a mix of shares, bonds and other in-
vestments), rather than trusting equity
specialists. Passive powerhouses like Van-
guard and BlackRock, both of which also
sell actively managed funds, are the main
beneﬁciaries of the upheaval in the indus-
try. In 2015 they captured almost half of the
industry’s net inﬂows. There is also hope
for newcomers: in China, some tech ﬁrms
have become asset managers, earning cus-
tom from their prominent and trusted
brands. A fund launched by Alibaba in
2014 quickly raised $90 billion from more
than 100m investors.
Some star active managers, such as
Bridgewater, a hedge fund, will continue to
win business. But those that do badly will
see their assets wither further, as with-
drawals compound poor returns. For in-
vestors, this is good news: the industry
may ﬁnally start beneﬁting them as much
as it does managers. 7

Investing in South Korea

Losing faith

S E O U L

Reuniﬁcation as an investment theme
MANY South Koreans suspect that their
country’s dream of reuniﬁcation
with destitute North Korea is best kept that
way. But in early 2014 the South’s presi-
dent, Park Geun-hye, began describing re-
uniﬁcation as a “bonanza”. It would be a
demographic boon, she suggested, marry-
ing the technological know-how of the
South, whose population may start shrink-
ing as soon as 2030, to the young northern
workforce. Resources, which are plentiful

in the North, would help to fuel the South’s
exports.
Soon afterwards, three South Korean
asset-management ﬁrms—HI, Kyobo AXA
and Shinyoung—all launched new-fangled
“uniﬁcation funds”: small equity funds
that invest in stocks which are expected to
gain from uniﬁcation. Within ten days of
opening, Shinyoung’s fund, the largest,
had attracted over 9 billion won ($8m); by
the end of 2014 it had sucked in 51 billion
won, and four other funds held a com-
bined total of 6.5 billion won. Since then,
money has been ﬂowing the other way: as-
sets in the small fund managed by HI have
halved; 10 billion won has ﬂown out of
Shinyoung’s fund.
The goal of the funds is to reap the ex-
pected beneﬁts of uniﬁcation in the long
run, and of closer economic co-operation
between the two Koreas in the short term.
HI’s fund includes shares in short-haul
ﬂight operators, likely to boom in a uniﬁed
peninsula. Shinyoung’s invests in South
Korean utility and construction ﬁrms; oth-
ers bank on North Korea’s 25m potential
consumers, investing for example in mak-
ers of electric rice cookers, says Kuk Min-
chung of Fund Online Korea, a South Kore-
an fund supermarket.
Jin Seong-nam of HI says that uniﬁca-
tion funds tend to attract investment when
relations between the Koreas are cordial,
on the expectation that cross-border busi-
ness will grow. Over the past year, alas, a
string of North Korean provocations has
heightened tensions. Last month the South
shuttered its last remaining economic pro-
ject with the North, a jointly run industrial
complex at Kaesong on the border. The
South Korean textile and electronics ﬁrms
with factories there at one point made up
around 20% of HI’s reuniﬁcation portfolio.
It has since cut that back to just 5%.
Yet this forced reversal does not seem to
have harmed the fund’s performance. Re-
turns in the month since the closure of the
Kaesong complex, at 10.7%, are far better
than the average for South Korean funds,
7%. Part of the reason is that a quarter of

Kaesong in happier times

Finance and economics 63

HI’s reuniﬁcation portfolio is in the KOS-
DAQ, the local version of America’s high-
tech NASDAQ market, which has been per-
forming well.
Shinyoung’s fund, in contrast, is heavily
weighted towards manufacturing giants
such as Samsung, an electronics ﬁrm, and
POSCO, a steel giant, which it thinks would
do well if the two Koreas became one. Both
are now struggling due to China’s slow-
down, and the fund is down 2.7% over the
past year—far worse than the average. It
seems that uniﬁcation-fund managers can
concoct a rationale for investing in almost
any South Korean ﬁrm. 7

Gold in India

A tarnished appeal

India’s government tries to curb
imports of gold—again
ASMALL room on the eighth ﬂoor of
Mumbai’s former cotton exchange is
where jewellery goes to die. At the Master
Bullion Assaying & Hallmarking Lab in the
heart of the gold district, superheated cru-
cibles melt elaborate bangles and earrings
into bars a central banker might recognise.
This alchemy is being promoted by the
government under a new “monetisation”
scheme designed to reduce India’s imports
of gold: the melted bling can be traded for a
bond which will return the same amount
of gold several years down the line, with
interest of up to 2.5% in the interim.
Gold is the bane of India’s exchequer.
Indians vie with Chinese as the world’s
biggest consumers, buying just under
1,000 tonnes a year and stashing it in ank-
lets, safe-deposit boxes and Hindu tem-
ples. As all but a few bangles’ worth is im-
ported, only oil accounts for a bigger share
of India’s trade deﬁcit. To put it another
way, the imports cost India more dollars
every year than it attracts from foreign in-
stitutions investing in stocks and bonds,
points out Ajit Ranade, an economist.
Although Indians have traditionally
used gold as part of a bride’s dowry and as
an oﬀering at temples, demand has bal-
looned in recent years. In 1982 they con-
sumed just 65 tonnes of the stuﬀ. Decades
of inﬂation and a much-debased rupee
have pushed savers towards what is, in ef-
fect, a convenient way to insulate their
nest-egg from the poor decisions of India’s
policymakers (and, just as often, from its
tax inspectors). In rupee terms, in other
words, gold has been a stellar investment.
Getting Indians to forgo gold for wed-
dings and religious oﬀerings is probably a
non-starter. Easier to target the portion that
is bought as an investment, especially in 

1

64 Finance and economics

Bonds are no substitute

2 rural areas where banks are scarce and
mistrusted. The government hopes it will
gather 50 tonnes of gold through its bond
scheme—a modest target given the coun-
try’s 20,000-tonne pile. Yet four months in
only three tonnes have been gathered.
That is hardly a surprise: government
schemes to collect gold have disappointed
since at least 1962, when Indira Gandhi,
then the prime minister’s daughter, hand-
ed over her own ﬁnery to ﬁnance a border
skirmish with China. Though gold and a
government bond backed by gold are
much the same on paper, they do not hold
the same appeal for those who favour gold
as a store of value. Indians who are com-
fortable with paperwork and banks sim-
ply aren’t big holders of gold, points out
Gurbachan Singh, an economist at the In-
dian Statistical Institute. By the same to-
ken, most Hindu temples, many of which
have hoards of gold donated by the pious,
have steered clear of the scheme, despite
pressure from the government. 
Policymakers have other ways of mak-
ing gold less appealing. A modest excise
tax in the recently unveiled budget has
kept jewellers across the country on strike
for a month. Gold sellers were already furi-
ous at import duties and rules forcing them
to identify customers buying more than
200,000 rupees’ ($3,000) worth. In addi-
tion, the central bank is discouraging lend-
ing to buy gold.
Several trends suggest gold may eventu-
ally lose its lustre. Inﬂation has fallen dra-
matically, reducing its value as a hedge. A
government scheme is giving hundreds of
millions of people bank accounts for the
ﬁrst time, providing them with an alterna-
tive way to save. Young people are said to
be less interested in wearing gold jewel-
lery than their parents.
If the government really wanted to ac-
celerate this shift, it could change its own
ways. Various laws steer a big share of

bank deposits into low-yielding govern-
ment debt and agricultural loans. That, in
turn, means that Indians earn little interest
on their savings, enhancing gold’s relative
appeal. Such ﬁnancial repression helps the
government fund itself cheaply. But
it
means that Indians are sitting on gold
equivalent in value to four months of eco-
nomic output. That could be ﬁnancing pro-
ductive investments instead. 7

Kenyan coﬀee

A bitter harvest

N a i r o b i

A cautionary tale about an
overregulated industry
COFFEE was once Kenya’s biggest for-
eign-exchange earner, but these days
the industry looks less perky. The coun-
try’s record, 127,000-tonne crop was all the
way back in the 1987-88 season. Output
plunged by 40% the following year, after
the global coﬀee cartel axed its quotas, ex-
posing the industry to competition. It has
been falling ever since: last year it was less
than 45,000 tonnes, a mere 0.5% of coﬀee
production worldwide.
That is not for lack of quality. Kenya’s ar-
abica coﬀee, grown in the highlands
around Mount Kenya, is world-renowned,
unlike the robusta produced in places like
Vietnam and Brazil and used in instant
granules. Domestic consumption is tiny,
but growing by as much as 20% a year, as
coﬀee-shop chains expand to cater to Ken-
ya’s growing middle class.
That middle class also craves better
housing, however, generating an insatia-
ble thirst for land among developers. Nai-
robi’s property market is bubbling. The

The Economist March 26th 2016

(KPCU),

road between the capital and Thika, a
town on the brink of being swallowed by
its northern suburbs, is lined with coﬀee
plantations that have been sold to devel-
opers. No one has bothered to pull up the
weeds overtaking the coﬀee bushes on one
hill-top outside Thika that is destined to be-
come 500 homes. 
For many smallholders, who account
for 60% of the country’s coﬀee production,
there just isn’t enough money in beans
anymore. Some small farmers have aban-
doned the crop altogether for vegetables or
other, more lucrative export crops, such as
macadamia nuts. It doesn’t have to be this
way. Coﬀee production in neighbouring
Uganda has more than doubled since 1990,
to 285,000 tonnes. In 2010, the most recent
year for which comparative data are avail-
able, Kenyan coﬀee farmers received 20%
of the export price of their crop, compared
with more than 80% in Uganda. 
Mismanagement has played a part in
the Kenyan industry’s decline. The Kenya
Planters Co-operative Union 
which owned 70% of the country’s milling
capacity at its peak as well as providing its
smallholder members with loans and
cheap fertiliser, went bust in 2009. It came
out of receivership in 2014, but allegations
about its past were aired last autumn and
led some farmers to threaten to leave their
harvests on the bushes in protest. These in-
cluded stories of a boardroom ﬁstﬁght over
the purchase of new computers, and of the
theft of all the machinery from the KPCU’s
Nairobi mill, as well as unconﬁrmed re-
ports that some of the organisation’s direc-
tors had looted loans and coﬀee-sale pro-
ceeds meant for its members for nearly two
decades before it went under. 
Regulation has left the industry with a
Byzantine structure that presents many op-
portunities for skimming oﬀ money. Only
10% of beans are bought directly from
farmers. Most smallholders belong to a co-
operative, which skins, ferments and dries
the coﬀee beans before passing them on to
a miller that ﬁnishes the processing and
grading. The bags then go to one of eight li-
censed marketing agents, which sell the
coﬀee to 60 local and international dealers
at the Nairobi Coﬀee Exchange.
The exchange’s auctions, which take
place in the bowels of a half-empty build-
ing in a rundown area of the city, had to in-
troduce a $1,500 dealer registration fee
after marketing agents withheld coﬀee in
2012 in protest at buyers that existed solely
to resell the free coﬀee samples to which
they were entitled. Disgruntled partici-
pants claim that “cartels” rig the bidding,
suppressing prices. One Kenyan journalist
claims to have witnessed dealers whistling
to each other as a signal to hold down
prices. The only noises your correspon-
dent heard in the dimly-lit room, which re-
sembles a 1960s lecture theatre, were
hushed murmurs and bleeps as traders

1

Looking for investors?

You have an investment projec t or an innovative business 
idea in the EU. We can help you ﬁ nd the funding . We can help 
you to be seen .

Use the European Investment Projec t Por tal to present your 
ideas to investors worldwide. Check if your projec t ﬁ ts the 
criteria and submit an early-bird application on

ec .europa .eu /e ipp

The Economist March 26th 2016

2

pressed buttons to place bids, and polite
applause when one lot of coﬀee sold at a
record price for the season.
Nonetheless, many of the mills, market-
ing agents and dealers are sister compa-
nies, which probably reduces competition
to buy the wares of farmers. The multi-lay-
ered system has been further complicated
by the decision of some local governments
to set up their own mills and marketing
agents. Further government meddling of
this sort, needless to say, is unlikely to solve
the industry’s problems.
In Uganda, in contrast, the industry has
been completely liberalised since 1992.
There are no auctions: middlemen com-
pete vigorously to buy directly from farm-
ers and sell on to exporters. If Kenya’s gov-
ernment wants to make good on its
promise to double coﬀee production by
2020, it should wake up to the smell of its
neighbour’s success. 7

Chinese economic data

Fudge-ocracy

S h a n g h a i

Peer-to-peer lending

A ripple of fear

N ew Y o r k

A fashionable form of credit encounters
its ﬁrst crunch
IN A ﬁnancial landscape that ranges from
the dreary to the disliked, peer-to-peer
lending stands out. P2P ﬁrms, also called
marketplace lenders, channel loans di-
rectly from institutional investors and indi-
viduals to borrowers, for a fee. In the pro-
cess, they have lowered interest rates for
many and expanded access to credit. They
have been growing pell-mell (see chart), in
part because their structure allows them to
escape much of the regulation being
heaped on banks. But recent months have

The way to get ahead in China is to manipulate statistics
IN THEORY Chinese oﬃcials receive
promotions based on their perfor-
mance against a range of targets: deliv-
ering strong growth, maintaining social
stability and, until recently, enforcing the
one-child policy. But scholars debate
whether the system really rewards those
who excel according to these (in any case
ﬂawed) metrics. Some believe the em-
phasis on merit is real, and helps explain
China’s stunning economic progress over
the past 35 years. Others reckon that
connections to the right leaders matter
more for those trying to advance their
careers. New research, however, suggests
a third option: that those who get ahead
are adept not at stimulating growth nor at
currying favour, but at cooking the books.

A recent paper from America’s Na-
tional Bureau of Economic Research uses
fertility rates as a way to test this theory.
Economists have found a relationship
between GDP growth in an oﬃcial’s
ﬁefdom and subsequent promotion, but
it is diﬃcult to know how accurate the
GDP ﬁgures are (a question that haunts
anyone following the Chinese economy).
Population data are diﬀerent: in addition
to the ﬁgures provided by local oﬃcials,
China conducts a census every ten years,
revising population data all the way
down to the village level. That makes it
possible to pinpoint where bureaucrats
have been ﬁddling the statistics.
Examining data on 967 mayors in 28
provinces from 1985 to 2000, Juan Carlos
Suárez Serrato and Xiao Yu Wang of Duke
University and Shuang Zhang of Univer-
sity of Colorado, Boulder, ﬁnd that oﬃ-
cials who claimed to have suppressed
population growth were rewarded.
Mayors who reduced the local birth rate
by one child per 1,000 people per year by
their own count had a 10% greater chance
of being promoted.
But the relationship between fertility
rates and career trajectory disappears
when using the census data rather than
the ﬁgures reported by the local oﬃcials
themselves. Mayors who received pro-
motions were no better or worse at curb-
ing population growth than those who
did not. The way to get ahead in the
Chinese bureaucracy, it seems, is to falsi-
fy statistics. It makes you wonder what
other data have been doctored.

Four babies, by the local count

Finance and economics 67

Peerless

United States, new loans issued, $bn

Prosper
Lending Club

4

3

2

1

0

2011

12

13

14

15

Source: Company f ilings

shown that they are not immune to the
burdens that weigh down their conven-
tional rivals.
On the face of things, it is business as
usual. Lending Club, the biggest P2P ﬁrm,
doubled its loan book last year. This year it
expects it to grow by 72%, to over $14 bil-
lion. Yet its share price has fallen below $9,
from a peak last year of $25. That is chieﬂy
due to America’s slowing economy and
rising interest rates (although the pace of
increases is likely to be slow—see Free ex-
change). Under such circumstances, delin-
quent loans tend to increase. Prosper, the
second-biggest P2P lender, has said that de-
linquencies are indeed rising on its riskier
loans, although it emphasised that only a
tiny subset of its portfolio had been aﬀect-
ed and that the deterioration was trivial.
Nevertheless, it has raised rates for all bor-
rowers, especially the riskier ones, who
now pay 31%. Lending Club has also raised
its interest rates. 
The primary motivation for these in-
creases may have been to reﬂect the risk of
credit losses, but it is also possible that rais-
ing funds has become tougher. Borrowing
costs in other risky markets have risen
sharply recently. The volume of loans that
P2P ﬁrms have sold in securitised packages
has halved since the end of last year. 
Meanwhile, a case working its way
through the courts may subject P2P loans
to state usury laws, from which banks with
a national charter are exempt. That would
prevent the P2P ﬁrms from lending to the
riskiest borrowers in much of America. In
addition, the Consumer Financial Protec-
tion Bureau, a federal agency, announced
this month that it would begin accepting
complaints about P2P consumer lending.
Nonetheless, the problems of P2P lend-
ing may be overstated, says Ram Ahluwa-
lia of PeerIQ, a ﬁrm that crunches data for
the industry. Securitisations may have
slowed but they have not stopped. De-
faults remain manageable. There may be
ways around an adverse ruling on usury
laws. And the market that P2P lending is ca-
tering to clearly has not been saturated. As
long as that remains the case, growth may
slow, but it is unlikely to stop. 7

68 Finance and economics

The Economist March 26th 2016

Free exchange

No exit

Global ﬁnancial integration is tying central bankers’ hands
IN THE weeks after December 17th, when the Federal Reserve
raised its benchmark interest rate for the ﬁrst time in nearly ten
years, conﬁdent Fed oﬃcials told markets to expect four addition-
al rate hikes in 2016. It has been obvious for a while that this guid-
ance was wildly optimistic. Economists have been downgrading
growth forecasts and markets have been retreating. At its meeting
earlier this month the Fed acknowledged reality: it not only left
rates unchanged, but also signalled in its projections that it ex-
pects to raise them by just two notches this year. This climbdown
was not a surprise, but it does conceal a surprising admission:
that American monetary policy is constrained, in part, by condi-
tions in global ﬁnancial markets.
The Fed is a collegial, consensus-driven central bank, but over
the past six months an internal debate has politely unfolded. One
group, led by Stanley Fischer, the vice-chairman, hews to a fairly
conventional view of the Fed’s task. Mr Fischer argues that low
unemployment leads inexorably to upward pressure on wages
and prices. In late 2015 hiring roared ahead, even though unem-
ployment stood at just 5%. A jump in inﬂation seemed inevitable.
In order to keep rising prices and wages under control, Mr Fi-
scher’s side reckoned, the Fed needed to act pre-emptively, if
gradually, to raise interest rates. This camp won the day in Decem-
ber, when projections published by the Fed suggested that the
federal funds rate would climb to 1.25-1.5% by the end of 2016.
The decision to raise rates in December was unanimous, but
there was no consensus on the appropriate pace for subsequent
increases. A second group, led by Lael Brainard, a member of the
Fed’s Board of Governors, worried that the global nature of ﬁnan-
cial markets, and the dollar’s critical role within them, required
the Fed to move slowly. In a speech in February Ms Brainard esti-
mated that global market movements, in the form of a rising dol-
lar and a growing gap between the rates at which governments
and riskier private companies could borrow, in eﬀect added 0.75
percentage points of additional tightening to the 0.25 percentage-
point increase the Fed made in December. The planned proces-
sion of additional hikes, if ampliﬁed in a similar way, might well
tip America and much of the world into recession. At the Fed’s
meeting in March, Ms Brainard’s side seems to have had the bet-
ter of the argument.
Ms Brainard reckons that in an era of deep ﬁnancial-market in-
tegration there can be no “Great Divergence” between policy in
America and the rest of the world. Over the past two decades a

The fear cycle

S&P 500

December 31st 2015=100

FOMC MEETING

FOMC MEETING

global glut of savings has depressed long-run interest rates all
over the place. Savings have piled up as skittish emerging-market
central banks stockpiled foreign-exchange reserves and as the
share of income ﬂowing to the savings-prone rich grew. Mean-
while, investment lagged, thanks to reduced expectations for
growth in the ageing countries of the rich world and, more recent-
ly, China. In an eﬀort to mobilise this sluggish capital and perk up
growth, central banks around the world have pushed down the
cost of borrowing.
In December the Fed calculated that American ﬁrms and
households were conﬁdent enough to keep spending even if
rates rose above zero. But capital ﬂows freely around the world,
and any country oﬀering a safe ﬁnancial return even a bit above
the norm attracts waves of money. Similarly, a shift in the relative
economic outlook—such as a downgrading in growth prospects
in China relative to those in America—can lead to sudden moves
in ﬁnancial markets as a torrent of capital seeks safety. 
In late 2015 the expectation of a rate rise in America sent capi-
tal gushing into the country, pushing up the value of the dollar
and tightening credit conditions elsewhere in the world. An ex-
pensive dollar makes American exports less competitive and
places a drag on growth and inﬂation in the American economy.
The eﬀect on investors’ appetite for risk is more immediate. 
Between the Fed’s December meeting and early February,
American stocks dropped by 10%; share prices in Europe and Asia
fell by more. The spread between corporate-bond yields and
those on safe government debt rose sharply (see chart). Not until
mid-February, as policymakers around the world sought to
soothe markets with promises to support growth, did the panic
dissipate. Since then, share prices have recovered and the dollar
has fallen in value; with its decision on March 16th, the Fed con-
ﬁrmed investors’ suspicion that it would not continue on its
planned tightening path.

Hell is other people’s money
The forces inhibiting the Fed are, if anything, getting stronger.
Central banks in Europe and Japan are loosening monetary poli-
cy in response to lacklustre economic conditions; China is easing,
too. Meanwhile, America’s recovery continues thanks to its mon-
etary reprieve, and various measures of inﬂation are moving
back toward the Fed’s 2% target with surprising speed. If the Fed
continues to stand pat, inﬂation may soon move above 2%, but if
it attempts to raise interest rates well above the global level it may
be inviting destabilising ﬁnancial ﬂows and an economy-chok-
ing rise in the dollar.
The balance of risks suggests the Fed should tolerate rising in-
ﬂation. A faster pace of increase in wages and prices would be a
healthy development for the American economy. Inﬂation has
been below 2% for four years; exceeding that level would aﬃrm
the Fed’s claim that 2% is a symmetrical target for inﬂation, rather
than a ceiling. A temporarily higher inﬂation rate might be an an-
noyance for some Americans, but it is preferable to imploding
portfolios and a risk of recession.
Even though Ms Brainard prevailed in March, the debate is
sure to continue. The Fed is bound to raise rates again at some
point, as inﬂation rises. Another torrent of mobile capital will
then ﬂood in, perhaps swamping the Fed’s attempts to go its own
way. The world should brace for more ﬁnancial storms. 7

105

100

95

90

85

High-yield corporate
bond spreads

Percentage points

9
FOMC MEETING

8

7

6

Dec

2015

Jan

Feb

2016

Mar

Sources: Bloomberg; Bank of Amer ica Merr ill Lynch

Economist.com/blogs/freeexchange

Property

69

The Economist March 26th 2016

70

Science and technology

Clinical tr ials

For my next trick...

been the main measures all along.
Outcome switching is a good example
of the ways in which science can go wrong.
This is a hot topic at the moment, with
ﬁelds from psychology to cancer research
going through a “replication crisis”, in
which published results evaporate when
people try to duplicate them. Now, a team
of researchers at the Centre for Evidence-
Based Medicine, at Oxford University,
have set up a project called COMPare, in
the hope of doing something about it.

Too many medical trials move their goalposts halfway through. A new initiative
aims to change that
PAXIL was a blockbuster. It was intro-
duced by its inventors, GlaxoSmith-
Kline (GSK), in 1992, as an antidepressant.
By the early 2000s it was earning the ﬁrm
nearly $2 billion a year. It was being pre-
scribed to millions of children and teen-
agers on the basis of a trial, called Study
329, which suggested it was a good treat-
ment for depressed youngsters. But when
British regulators took a second look at
Study 329, in 2003, they concluded that it
had been misleadingly presented. Not
only did Paxil do little to help youngsters
with depression, it often made things
worse—to the extent of making some who
took it suicidal. In 2012 the American au-
thorities imposed the biggest ﬁne in the
history of the pharmaceutical industry, $3
billion, on GSK for misreporting data on a
variety of drugs, of which Paxil was one. 
Since then, Study 329 has become one
of the best-known examples of a piece of
academic sleight-of-hand called “outcome
switching”. This is a procedure in which
the questions that a scientiﬁc study was set
up to answer are swapped part way
through for a diﬀerent lot. Study 329 set out
to measure the impact of Paxil on eight dif-
ferent variables, all based around how par-
ticipants scored on a variety of depression
tests. None showed that it was any better
than a placebo sugar pill, but the research-
ers who wrote the paper came up with 19
new measures. Most of those showed no
beneﬁt either, but four did. In the paper,
those four were presented as if they had

Go COMPare
Outcome switching can sometimes be
done for good reasons: participants may
refuse to ﬁll in a long form, for instance,
meaning that no data can be collected from
it. But it can also let unscrupulous research-
ers go on “ﬁshing expeditions” to prove
whatever they want. Collect enough data,
and correlations that look statistically sig-
niﬁcant will appear by chance. Pick them
out after the event and you have, unless
you re-test to demonstrate that they were
not ﬂukes, proved nothing.
Study 329 ﬁnished in 1998. These days,
such shenanigans are supposed to be im-
possible. American and European regula-
tors require trials to be registered before
they begin, complete with information
about what they will be investigating and
how they will go about it, so that research-
ers can check their colleagues have done
what they promised to do. But enforce-
ment is lax. A meta-analysis—a study of

The Economist March 26th 2016

Also in this section

71 Cities’ soundscapes

71 How death helps science

72 Ecology and photography

72 Commercialising academic software

73 Tracking skin cells dur ing healing

For daily analysis and debate on science and
technology, visit

Economist.com/science

studies—published in BMC Medicine in 2015
found that 31% of clinical trials did not stick
to the measurements they had planned to
use. Another paper, published in PLOS ONE,
also in 2015, examined 137 medical trials
over a six-month period and found that
18% had altered their primary outcomes
halfway through the trial, while 64% had
done the same with secondary, less-impor-
tant measures of success.
The COMPare team’s results are similar.
They analysed all the clinical trials report-
ed between October and January in the
ﬁve most prestigious medical journals—
speciﬁcally, the New England Journal of
Medicine, the Journal of the American Medi-
cal Association, the Lancet, Annals of Inter-
nal Medicine and the BMJ—looking for evi-
dence of outcome switching. 
That came to a total of 67 diﬀerent trials.
Of those, nine were perfect—they had
done exactly what they had said they
would do, or if they had changed their
measurements, they had said so plainly
and given their reasons. The other 58,
though, had ﬂaws. Between them they
contained 300 outcomes that should have
been reported but were not, while 357 new
outcomes, not speciﬁed in the documents
describing what the trial would be doing,
were silently added. 
Where previous research has merely
described the problem, says Ben Goldacre,
a British doctor and epidemiologist who is
leading the project, COMPare hopes to do
something about it. For every imperfect
trial, the team wrote a letter to the editors
of the relevant journal, pointing out the in-
consistencies with the aim of setting the re-
cord straight. 
So far, responses have been mixed. Of
58 letters COMPare has sent out since the
project began, seven have been published.
Another 16 were rejected by the journals,
who argued either that the problem was
insigniﬁcant or that attentive, industrious 

1

The Economist March 26th 2016

Science and technology 71

Urban planning

Listen up

How to map city soundscapes using social media
“VIBRANT” is a word often used in
guide books to describe a partic-
ular quarter of a city: Soho, in London, for
example. But what does that actually
mean? To Daniele Quercia of Bell Labs in
Cambridge, England, and his colleagues,
the term has a literal truth to it. Soho is a
place of good vibrations through the
air—good sounds, in other words. It
shares this with the Gothic quarter of
Barcelona, for example, but not with
much of Mayfair and Belgravia, up-
market London districts near Soho that
Dr Quercia brands sonically “chaotic”.
He and his colleagues, who report
their results in Royal Society Open Science
this week, have been making sound
maps of the two cities. In so far as city
planners incorporate matters sonic into
their thinking, Dr Quercia notes, they
take most notice of noise. This form of
sound, being by deﬁnition annoying, has
political resonance, and planners do
their best to minimise it. But sound can
also be soothing, exhilarating, saddening,
surprising and many other things be-
sides. These aspects of the urban sound-
scape are little-studied. Dr Quercia thinks
this is a pity. The spread of information
technology, and in particular of social
media, has created a pool of data about

urban sounds that can be tagged to pre-
cise locations. That has let him and his
team start correcting the omission.
Using a statistical analysis of people’s
reactions to diﬀerent sorts of urban
sound, the team drew up four broad
categories: chaotic, calm, monotonous
and vibrant. Mechanical sounds tended
to be chaotic. Human ones tended to be
vibrant. The sounds of nature, though,
could be either calm or monotonous.
Birds chirping were calming. Crickets
chirping were monotonous. Rain patter-
ing down from the sky was monotonous,
but dripping from trees it was calming.
Drawing on social media to show which
sounds people report hearing around
them in particular places, the team then
mapped the centres of the two cities
accordingly.
Not surprisingly, parks, such as Hyde
Park, sound calm. More surprisingly
beaches (at least, those in Barcelona) are
monotonous. But, main roads aside (they
are usually chaotic), a stranger to either
city would have diﬃculty predicting
from a map which streets would have
good vibes and which would seem cha-
otic. That would bear further investiga-
tion, and perhaps even the attention of
forward-thinking planning departments.

Sounds of the city

Sonic moods of central London

Mood:

Chaotic

Calm

Monotonous

Vibrant

Soho

Hyde Park

Mayfair

Belgravia

T H A MES

The City

London Br idge

Sources: L. Aiello; R. Schifanella; D. Quercia; F. Aletta; Car toDB; OpenStreetMap

GREATER LONDON

2 readers could work out for themselves
what had happened. The rest have seem-
ingly been ignored.
Dr Goldacre—who has built a reputa-
tion as a crusader for open science—says
some journals’ responses surprised him.
He points out that all ﬁve have signed up to
guidelines that require them to police out-
come switching and to make sure papers
they publish do not engage in it. The

COMPare team plans to collate the re-
sponses into another scientiﬁc paper, to be
published shortly. “I would regard this as a
provocation study,” says Dr Goldacre, us-
ing the immunological meaning of the
term. “When you provoke the system, the
responses you get tell you a lot about how
the system works. But we’re not doing this
to be provocative and snide, we’re doing it
to understand the pathology.” 7

The sociology of science

In death, there is
life

Big-name scientists may end up stiﬂing
progress in their ﬁelds
MAX PLANCK, the inventor of quan-
tum theory, once said that science ad-
vances one funeral at a time. He meant—or,
at least, is presumed to have meant—that
the death of a dominant mind in a ﬁeld lib-
erates others with diﬀerent points of view
to make their cases more freely, without
treading on the toes of established author-
ity. It might also rearrange patterns of fund-
ing, for they, too, often reﬂect established
hierarchies. 
But was Planck right? For almost a de-
cade Pierre Azoulay of the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology has been trying to
ﬁnd out. His conclusion, reported in a
working paper by the National Bureau of
Economic Research, is a qualiﬁed “yes”. 
Dr Azoulay ﬁrst published on the sub-
ject in 2010 in the Quarterly Journal of Eco-
nomics. On that occasion he came to an ap-
parently diﬀerent conclusion. This was
that the death of a star resulted in a marked
slowing of the published output of the
star’s collaborators, a phenomenon which
sometimes lasted for decades. But subse-
quent conversations led him to suspect
this was not the whole story. Some scien-
tists he spoke to agreed that the Quarterly
Journal paper captured their experience.
Others, though, dissented. These latter
claimed that a star’s dominance often
sucked the intellectual oxygen from a ﬁeld,
and that his or her demise let it back in.
With the assistance of two others,
Christian Fons-Rosen of the Pompeu Fabra
University in Barcelona and Joshua Graﬀ
Zivin of the University of California, San
Diego, Dr Azoulay decided to dig deeper.
The trio focused on biology, America and
the period between 1975 and 2003. They
mined online databases to extract the pub-
lication records of biologists working in
diﬀerent ﬁelds before and after the deaths
of stars in those ﬁelds. Crucially, their data
included both people who had collaborat-
ed with the star, and people who had not.
The three researchers’ deﬁnition of sci-
entiﬁc stardom rested on such criteria as
patents held, funding received and publi-
cations widely cited. Among those stars
they identiﬁed, 452 also had in common
the fact that they had died early—meaning,
in this context, before they could retire or
leave active research to take up administra-
tive roles. They were, in other words, at
their intellectual peaks.
Gratifyingly for Dr Azoulay, he and his
colleagues conﬁrmed his earlier ﬁnding. A
star’s collaborators did indeed produce 

1

72 Science and technology

The Economist March 26th 2016

2 fewer articles after that star’s death—as
many as 40% less a year, on average. But
they also found a contrary eﬀect. This was
that publications by researchers who had
not collaborated with the star (and who
were indeed sometimes working in entire-
ly diﬀerent ﬁelds at the time of the “extinc-
tion event”) increased by 8% a year. Within
ﬁve years of a star’s death, the increase in
non-collaborators’ articles had fully com-
pensated for the drop-oﬀ in those of the
collaborators.
That the loss of his mentor would harm
an acolyte’s career makes perfect sense.
Why outsiders should beneﬁt, though, is
less clear. Dr Azoulay found that few of the
stars in his sample sat on committees that
distributed funds or edited journals, so ex-
plicit favouritism does not seem to be the
answer. Perhaps the explanation does in-
deed lie in that woolly but evocative
phrase, “intellectual oxygen”. A star’s
death gives outsiders room to breathe.
Morbid though the thought is, Dr Azou-
lay’s hypothesis has the scientiﬁc virtue of
generating testable predictions. Among
the inﬂuential scientists who have died
prematurely in the past two years are Da-
vid Flockhart, who helped create the ﬁeld
of personalised medicine; Yoshiki Sasai, a
prominent stem-cell biologist; and Allison
Doupe, a neurobiologist who studied bird-
song as a model for human language. It
will be interesting to see how the careers of
others in these ﬁelds now evolve. 7

Ecology

Pictures of guilly

Old photos are an untapped record of
animal populations
IN GENERAL, the longer an ecological
study goes on for, the more valuable it be-
comes. This is usually done, funding agen-
cies permitting, by extending it into the fu-
ture. Extending it into the past is tricker. It is
not, though, impossible—as Jonas Hentati-
Sundberg and Olof Olsson of Stockholm
University show in a paper published this
week in Current Biology.
Dr Hentati-Sundberg and Dr Olsson
borrowed an idea that historians of archi-
tecture are starting to use to track changes
to buildings—looking at
tourist photo-
graphs taken over the years. That works
well for much-snapped ediﬁces in holiday
hotspots, but getting equivalent sets of pic-
tures for parts of the natural environment
means ﬁnding something speciﬁc that is
equally photogenic. Fortunately, the two
researchers think they have done so.
Their something is Stora Karlsö in the
Baltic Sea. This island is well known to or-

As it was in 1950 and 2014

nithologists as a nesting site for guillemots
and razorbills. Crucially, it has been a desti-
nation for daily tours to look at its cliﬀs
since the 1920s—and was, before that, a roy-
al hunting ground. The result is a trove of
photographs, albeit one that is scattered
around Sweden.
The task Dr Hentati-Sundberg and Dr
Olsson set themselves was to ﬁnd as many
of the photos as they could, and subject
them to scientiﬁc scrutiny. To do that, they
searched through national and regional ar-
chives, collaborated with photo agencies,
and put requests in magazines and internet
forums. Working this way, they tracked
down more than 200 shots of the same
cliﬀ face (see above for a pair of examples),
taken in 37 diﬀerent years between 1918
and 2005, and then every year until 2015.
They concentrated on the breeding sea-
son, and on guillemots in particular, since
members of this species nest communally
and are faithful to the same sites from year
to year. They thereby hoped to judge the
guillemot population’s health by noting
from their photographs how many nests
were occupied by birds that were either in-
cubating eggs or brooding hatchlings.
That focus on the breeding season (May
1st to July 10th in the case of guillemots) re-
stricted the set of photos they could use to
113 snaps that were either speciﬁcally dated
as having been taken between those days,
or which appeared to have been from the
state of the vegetation shown in them. In
each of the 113 images the researchers
counted all the birds they could see. They
found that there were 182 nesting pairs in
1918, a number that rose slowly, to 304, by
1950. By 1964 there were 508 pairs, but that
dropped back to a low of 353 in 1981. After
this, the birds started to recover again, and
have done so spectacularly. In 1998 there
were 571 pairs; in 2015, 1,209.
Dr Hentati-Sundberg and Dr Olsson in-
terpret the initial half-century rise as being
a consequence of the end of hunting and
egg-collecting on the island. They put the
decline after 1964 down to contaminants
such as DDT and a growth in the practice of

ﬁshing for salmon with drift nets, which
snag and drown birds that ﬂy in to grab
what looks like an easy meal. And they at-
tribute the latest rebound to the result of
curbs on such substances and practices.
How widely deployable the method
they have developed will be remains to be
seen. What worked on Stora Karlsö would
surely work for seabird colonies else-
where, many of which are the subjects of
regular photography. Whether it could be
adapted for other habitats is less clear.
There may, though, be places like national
parks where tourists are so abundant that
useful ecological information can indeed
be extracted from dusty albums squir-
relled away in the world’s attics. 7

Software engineer ing

Of more than
academic interest

O x f o r d

Professors’ unprofessional programs
have created a new profession
SOME programmers call
it “spaghetti
code”. Though error-strewn, it works—
most of the time. It is likely to have been
written in an out-of-date language, possi-
bly more than one of them. It has grown by
accretion, as diﬀerent graduate students
and postdocs, many long since departed to
other institutions, have tweaked it, ﬁxed it
and patched it. And it is, of course, unanno-
tated, so nobody really knows what is go-
ing on inside it. 
In the rareﬁed atmosphere of acade-
mia, where enthusiasm is all and budgets
are tight, that is generally good enough. For
commercial applications, though, it is in-
tolerable. Yet academic spaghetti code fre-
quently contains commercially useful
ideas that might be sold to outside compa-
nies or employed as the basis of new, start-
up businesses. So there is a market niche
available to be occupied by those willing 

1

The Economist March 26th 2016

2 to take the stuﬀ and untangle it.
One occupant of said niche is Oxford
Computer Consultants (OCC), a ﬁrm
based in the eponymous English city. A re-
cent project it carried out was the transfor-
mation of drug-testing software developed
by researchers at Oxford University into a
commercial package called Virtual Assay,
which can speed up preclinical trials of pu-
tative medicines. A second began with
pieces of code written partly in Fortran, a
programming language devised in the
1950s, and partly in Matlab, a more mod-
ern language, by researchers at Southamp-
ton University. This mixture was turned
into RoCiT, a system that engineers at Na-
tional Grid, the ﬁrm which (among other
things) runs Britain’s electricity-distribu-
tion network, use to calculate the maxi-
mum power that underground cables can
carry safely.
According to Reynold Greenlaw, one of
OCC’s directors, cleaning up spaghetti
code starts with the obvious but not-al-
ways-easy step of getting a copy of the pro-
gram to run on one of the ﬁrm’s own ma-
chines—and, once it is running, to turn out
the same results as it does on the origina-
tor’s machine. That done, each of the pro-
gram’s parts can be examined and tested
individually, translated into a more mod-
ern computing language if required, and
upgraded as necessary. Only then, when
all parts are working properly, is the spa-
ghetti untangled, the entire program re-
structured into something a commercial
programmer would accept, and annota-
tion added to it so that other programmers
can understand exactly how it works.
As might be expected, OCC is not alone
in its mission to transmogrify academic
software into something business can use.
Such an industry exists in America, too.
There, though, universities often try to
keep the process within their walls. The
Venture Development Centre of the Uni-
versity of Massachusetts, in Boston, is one
example of an in-house spaghetti untan-
gler for researchers who want to go com-
mercial. The New York University School
of Engineering Incubator is another. A
third is the Southern Tier Startup Alliance
at Cornell, also in New York state.
Untangling spaghetti code in this way
would not, of course, be necessary if re-
searchers were better programmers in the
ﬁrst place. But that would involve a change
in their incentives, because for most aca-
demics writing software is merely a means
to an end rather than an end in itself. Those
who do put eﬀort into producing good
code risk being seen by their colleagues as
time-wasters.
Some brave souls are, nevertheless, try-
ing to encourage this change. One such is
Neil Chue Hong, founder and head of the
Software Sustainability Institute (SSI) at
Edinburgh University. The SSI has the self-
appointed mission (backed by govern-

Science and technology 73

ment funding agencies) of encouraging
British academics to code sensibly from
the beginning—for their own good, as well
as that of any commercial spin-oﬀs.
Mr Chue Hong is a relative newcomer
to the task of teaching good programming
practices to academics, for the SSI was
founded in 2010. Greg Wilson has been at it
since 1998, when he started “software car-
pentry” workshops at Toronto University.
He now runs the Software Carpentry
Foundation, an international charity, but
has not yet succeeded in turning the major-
ity of computing’s academic bodgers into
craftsmen. The spaghetti-untanglers,
it
seems, will be around for a while yet. 7

Dermatology

Rainbow’s
beginning

The epidermis now comes in
Technicolor
VERTEBRATE animals, human beings
included, are constantly changing their
skin—producing new layers of it as old cells
slough oﬀ from the surface. Understanding
this process of regeneration would help
the treatment of skin diseases and of inju-
ries such as burns. This week, a group of re-
searchers led by Kenneth Poss of Duke Uni-
versity Medical Centre, in North Carolina,
have announced a colourful new tech-
nique that should enhance such under-
standing. They dub it the “skinbow”.
Skinbows are themselves an adapta-
tion of an approach called a “brainbow”,
invented almost a decade ago, that is used
to label nerve cells diﬀerent colours. Brain-
bow technology permits someone with an
appropriate microscope to trace the con-
nections that lots of individual nerve cells
make with one another in the brain of, say,
a mouse.
Dr Poss’s experimental animal is not a
mammal but a ﬁsh: the zebraﬁsh. This spe-
cies is widely employed in the study of em-
bryology, and is thus well understood.
Skinbow or brainbow, though, the basic

procedure is the same. Genetic engineer-
ing is used to create lines of animals whose
genomes contain multiple copies of genes
for proteins that glow under ultraviolet
light. These genes are controlled by DNA
switches that are activated only in the ap-
propriate tissue type—brain for brainbows,
skin for skinbows. In the case of skinbows,
some of the proteins glow red, some glow
green and some glow blue. 
To create diﬀerent hues out of these
three primary colours, animals are subject-
ed to a technique called site-speciﬁc re-
combination, to which the ﬂuorescent-pro-
tein genes have been primed to be
susceptible. Site-speciﬁc recombination
randomly deletes some of those genes.
Cells thus aﬀected, and their descendants,
will therefore glow red, green and blue to
diﬀerent degrees, and each speciﬁc mix of
primaries will give that group a hue dis-
tinct from all of the others.
At the moment Dr Poss reckons his mi-
croscopes can distinguish 70-80 such hues.
This, as he and his colleagues describe in
Developmental Cell, has given them one of
the most detailed views of skin regenera-
tion yet seen. Moreover, unlike brainbow
technology, which requires that the animal
be killed in order to see what is going on, a
skinbow is visible from the outside. Regen-
erative processes can thus be followed
over an extended period. 
The researchers could, for example, ob-
serve in detail how a ﬁsh responds to inju-
ry. When they amputated a ﬁn from one of
their charges, they were able to track cells
moving to the site of the damage and help-
ing to repair it. They also saw new cells ris-
ing from deeper layers of the skin to sup-
plement those that had migrated to heal
the injured ﬁn. After two to three weeks of
this, the ﬁn had regrown completely.
The next stage will be to test how ﬁsh
skin responds to diseases, and to drugs that
might treat those diseases. In the fullness
of time, the technology might be extended
to look at skin regeneration in other spe-
cies, mammals included. Even while re-
stricted to ﬁsh, though, it is likely to yield
useful insights into the process of regenera-
tion—not to mention the possibility of a
nice little sideline in the creation of design-
er denizens for aquaria. 7

Scars and str ipes

74

Books and arts

Evolution of the internet

Growing up

How the internet lost its free spirit
RARELY has a manifesto been so wrong.
“A Declaration of the Independence of
Cyberspace”, written 20 years ago by John
Perry Barlow, a digital civil-libertarian, be-
gins thus: “Governments of the Industrial
World, you weary giants of ﬂesh and steel,
I come from Cyberspace, the new home of
Mind. On behalf of the future, I ask you of
the past to leave us alone. You are not wel-
come among us. You have no sovereignty
where we gather.” 
At the turn of the century, it seemed as
though this techno-Utopian vision of the
world could indeed be a reality. Entertain-
ment and information, once extravagantly
priced or locked away in dusty govern-
ment oﬃces, became instantly accessible.
Brilliant youngsters set out to “organise the
world’s information” and “make the world
more open and connected”. It was easy on-
line communication that helped Egyptians
organise to topple Hosni Mubarak. 
It didn’t last. States do not allow new
territories to go ungoverned for very long.
Europe’s competition commissioner
is
pursuing Google with antitrust charges.
Apple has been locked in a battle with the
FBI over whether it should compromise 
security on its iPhones. Autocratic govern-
ments around the world learned from
Egypt and have invested in online-surveil-
lance gear. Filtering systems restrict access:
to porn in Britain, to Facebook and Google
in China, to dissent in Russia. 
Competing operating systems and net-

Splinternet: How Geopolitics and
Commerce are Fragmenting the World
Wide Web. By Scott Malcomson. OR
Books; 198 pages; $15 and £10

works oﬀer inducements to keep their us-
ers within the fold, consolidating their
power. Their algorithms personalise the
web so that no two people get the same
search results or social media feeds, betray-
ing the idea of a digital commons. Five
companies account for nearly two-thirds
of revenue from advertising, the dominant
business model of the web. Of the million-
odd apps available for download, most
people use fewer than 30 a month. 
The open internet accounts for barely
20% of the entire web. The rest of it is hid-
den away in unsearchable “walled gar-
dens” such as Facebook, whose algorithms
are opaque, or on the “dark web”, a shady
parallel world wide web. Data gathered
from the activities of internet users are 
being concentrated in fewer hands (see
Special Report, after page 42). And big
hands they are too. BCG, a consultancy,
reckons that the internet will account for
5.3% of GDP of the world’s 20 big econo-
mies this year, or $4.2 trillion. 
How did this come to pass? The simple
reply is that the free, open, democratic 
internet dreamed up by the optimists of
Silicon Valley was never more than a brief 
interlude. The more nuanced answer is

The Economist March 26th 2016

Also in this section

75 Existentialism at the café

76 The future of China

76 International Pop

77 Johnson: Noam Chomsky

For daily analysis and debate on books, ar ts and
culture, visit

Economist.com/culture

that the open internet never really existed.
That should not have come as a sur-
prise. As Scott Malcomson writes in “Splin-
ternet”, an illuminating survey of the past
and future of the internet, it was developed
“by the US military to serve US military
purposes”. In fact, nearly every technology
that makes smartphones so delightful
started life as a tool of war. The Washing-
ton naval treaty, signed soon after the ﬁrst
world war to limit the size of warships, was
silent on the matter of weaponry; that pro-
vided the impetus to develop machines ca-
pable of the complex mathematical calcu-
lations required to aim and ﬁre guns
accurately. The attack on Pearl Harbour
spurred what would become the ﬁrst com-
puter with an operating system. The com-
puter screen came from the need for radar-
tracking screens. 
So it is with the internet, argues Mr Mal-
comson. The Advanced Research Projects
Agency, which created the internet’s fore-
bear, ARPANET, was President Eisenhow-
er’s response to the launch of Sputnik by
the Soviet Union, he writes. The decentral-
ised, packet-based system of communica-
tion that forms the basis of the internet
originated in America’s need to withstand
a massive attack on its soil. Even the much-
ballyhooed Silicon Valley model of ven-
ture capital as a way to place bets on risky
new businesses has military origins.
In the 1980s the American military
began to lose interest in the internet. Priori-
ties shifted further with the fall of the Sovi-
et Union and end of the cold war. The time
had come for the hackers and geeks who
had been experimenting with early
computers and phone lines. 
Today they are the giants. Google, 
Apple, Facebook, Amazon and Microsoft—
together with some telecoms operators—
help set policy in Europe and America on
everything from privacy rights and copy-

1

The Economist March 26th 2016 

2 right law to child protection and national
security. As these companies grow more
powerful, the state is pushing back. 
There are two potential drawbacks to
this reassertion of established power over
the internet, both serious. The ﬁrst is the
threat from surveillance and its potential
chilling eﬀects on free speech. The disclo-
sures made by Edward Snowden in 2013
about the mass collection of data by Amer-
ican and other
intelligence agencies
showed that the temptation to hoover up
digital information can be hard to resist for
even the most liberal countries. And the
commercial data-gathering by big web
companies means they often know us bet-
ter than we know ourselves. When people
know they are being watched, they are
likely to self-censor and to change their
behaviour in response.
The other big risk is that the tension be-
tween states and companies resolves into
a symbiotic relationship. A leaked e-mail
shows a Google executive communicating
with Hillary Clinton’s state department
about an online tool that would be “im-
portant in encouraging more [Syrians] to
defect and giving conﬁdence to the opposi-
tion.” If technology ﬁrms with global reach
quietly promote the foreign-policy inter-
ests of one country, that can only increase
suspicion and accelerate the fracturing of
the web into regional internets. 
This does not mean, however, that
governments—at least democratic ones—
should always keep their hands oﬀ the
internet. Why should it be free of oversight
when every other sphere of human activi-
ty is governed by laws and codes of con-
duct agreed upon by society at large? A
well-regulated, well-governed internet is
in the best interests of its users. And if that
means losing some of the spirit of the early
internet, that is a small price to pay, espe-
cially for the vast majority of the internet’s
3.3 billion-odd users who lack much tech-
nological expertise. 
The internet of 1996 and the internet of
2016 have little in common. When Mr Bar-
low wrote his manifesto, some 50m peo-
ple, or 0.86% of the world, used the inter-
net. Today well over 40% of humanity is
online. No system of this scale can be
completely self-governing. 
Mr Malcomson describes the internet
as a “global private marketplace built on a
government platform, not unlike the glo-
bal airport system”. He does not push his
metaphor far enough. Pining for the deca-
dent, freewheeling internet of old is not
dissimilar to romantic notions of the gold-
en age of air travel, with its three-course
meals and plenty of leg room. But that in-
ternet, like that era of air travel, was the do-
main of a small group of rich, highly edu-
cated, largely male users. Air travel today
may be less luxurious but it is vastly more
aﬀordable and democratic. So too, for all
its ﬂaws, is the internet. 7

Existentialism

Smokey and the
bandits 

At the Existentialist Café: Freedom, Being
and Apr icot Cocktails. By Sarah Bakewell.
Other Press; 439 pages; $25. Chatto &
Windus; £16.99
EXISTENTIALISM is the only philosophy
that anyone would even think of calling
sexy. Black clothes, “free love”, late nights
of smoky jazz—these were a few of intellec-
tuals’ favourite things in Paris after the
city’s liberation in 1944. 
Simone de Beauvoir was “the prettiest
Existentialist you ever saw”, according to
the New Yorker in 1947. Her companion,
Jean-Paul Sartre (pictured) was no looker,
but he smoked a mean Gauloise. Life maga-
zine billed their friend, Albert Camus, the
“action-packed intellectual”. 
Certainly there was action. One eve-
ning in Paris, a restaurant punch-up involv-
ing Sartre, Camus, de Beauvoir and Arthur
Koestler spilled out on to the streets. In
New York another novelist, Norman Mail-
er, drunkenly stabbed his wife at the
launch of his abortive campaign to run for
mayor on an “Existentialist Party” ticket in
1960. In addition to such excitements, exis-
tentialism oﬀered a rationale for the feeling
that life is absurd.
Countless adolescents, both young and
old, have discovered the joys of angst
through the writings of Sartre and his ilk.
In her instructive and entertaining study of
these thinkers and their hangers-on, Sarah
Bakewell, a British biographer, tells how
she was drawn as a teenager to Sartre’s
“Nausea” because it was described on the
cover as “a novel of the alienation of perso-
nality and the mystery of being”. 
It was over apricot cocktails on the Rue

Books and arts 75

Montparnasse that Sartre and de Beauvoir
glimpsed a novel way to explore such mys-
teries. The year was 1932, and their friend
Raymond Aron, a political scientist and
philosopher, had just returned from Ger-
many with news of the “phenomenology”
of Edmund Husserl and Martin Heidegger.
“If you are a phenomenologist,” Aron ex-
plained, “you can talk about this cocktail
and make philosophy out of it!” The idea
was to glean the essence of things by close-
ly observing one’s own experience of
them, preferably in mundane settings. Sar-
tre and de Beauvoir set out to do just that.
Drawing on considerable personal
knowledge, Sartre delved into “the mean-
ing of the act of smoking”, among other
things. Observing the behavioural tics of
waiters, he noted that they sometimes
seemed to be play-acting at being waiters.
This led to labyrinthine reﬂections on the
nature of freedom and authenticity. De
Beauvoir’s eﬀorts were more focused. By
dissecting female experience of everyday
life, she illustrated the ways in which gen-
der is shaped by self-consciousness and so-
cial expectations. Ms Bakewell plausibly
suggests that de Beauvoir’s pioneering
feminist work, “The Second Sex”, was the
most broadly inﬂuential product of Euro-
pean café philosophy of the period. 
When Norman Mailer was asked what
existentialism meant to him, he reportedly
answered, “Oh, kinda playing things by
ear.” Serious existentialists, such as Sartre,
earned their label by focusing on a sense of
“existence” that is supposedly distinctive
of humans. People are uniquely aware of—
and typically troubled by—their own state
of being, or so the theory goes. Human ex-
istence is thus not at all like the existence of
brute matter, or, for that matter, like the ex-
istence of brutes. People, but not animals,
ﬁnd themselves thrown into the world, as
existentialists liked to say. They are forced
to make sense of it for themselves and to
forge their own identities. 
The café philosophers came to regard
each other’s existence as particularly trou-
bling. Except for Sartre and de Beauvoir,
who remained an intellectually devoted
pair until his death in 1980, the main char-
acters in post-war French philosophy
drifted apart with varying degrees of
drama. So did the German philosophers
who inspired them.
Sartre’s embrace of Soviet commu-
nism, which he abandoned only to en-
dorse Maoism instead, led Aron to con-
demn him as “merciless towards the
failings of the democracies but ready to tol-
erate the worst crimes as long as they are
committed in the name of the proper doc-
trines”. Ms Bakewell credits the existential-
ist movement, broadly deﬁned, with pro-
viding inspiration to feminism, gay rights,
anti-racism, anti-colonialism and other
radical causes. A few cocktails can, it
seems, lead to unexpected things. 7

76 Books and arts

China

Chronicle of a
death foretold

China’s Future. By David Shambaugh. Polity;
195 pages; $19.95 and £14.99
EVERY few years a high-proﬁle commen-
tator gains fame and sometimes shame
by predicting the imminent disintegration
of the Chinese Communist Party. In 1989
many China-watchers disagreed only on
whether it would take weeks or months for
the Communist Party to crumble after it
ordered government troops—the People’s
Liberation Army—to crush the people’s lib-
eration. In 2001 Gordon Chang wrote a
book, “The Coming Collapse of China”, in
which he predicted that a ﬁnancial crisis
would fell the regime within a decade.
A year ago, David Shambaugh, an
American political scientist, ﬁred his open-
ing shot as the new doomsayer, with a pro-
vocative opinion piece in the Wall Street
Journal: “The Coming Chinese Crackup”.
In it he wrote that “the endgame of Chi-
nese communist rule has now begun,” and
forecast the regime’s “protracted, messy
and violent” demise.
His new book, “China’s Future”, elabo-
rates this view. Mr Shambaugh has long ar-
gued that China is less powerful than
many people think and that this makes its
future “one of the key global uncertainties
over the coming decades”. The concern is
partly about an economy that is so central
to the global one. But China’s trajectory
also raises a bigger question: no country
has yet been able to modernise its econ-
omy without becoming a democracy. Can
China break the model?
His bald conclusion is “no”. China to-
day is more repressive than at any time
since the early 1990s, says Mr Shambaugh,
bringing the country close to falling apart.
The political system is “badly broken” and
the wealthy elite have lost conﬁdence in it.
Like Mr Chang, he highlights systemic eco-
nomic traps from which it will struggle to
escape. Writing here for the general reader,
Mr Shambaugh uses years of earlier aca-
demic research to put this repression in
context.
From the 1950s onwards China has
been beset by political oscillations, with
occasional periods of opening up followed
by phases of tightened control. Mr Sham-
baugh also looks at the tensions between
state and society in an authoritarian
regime. He reminds readers that what
made the mass pro-democracy protests in
Tiananmen Square in 1989 so threatening
to the Communist Party was that they had
high-proﬁle supporters within the elite,
some of whom were making slighter, but
potentially successful attempts to eﬀect

The Economist March 26th 2016

real political reform themselves.
Looking forward, the author declares
that China now faces a choice: reform or
die. Ultimately, he reckons, it will stick to its
current course of “hard authoritarianism”,
corroding the party’s ability to govern, con-
straining economic progress and stiﬂing 
innovation. He does well to disentangle
which aspects of China’s predicament are
distinct. All societies face a “revolution of
rising expectations” as they get richer, he
notes, but for autocratic governments like
China’s, these pose an existential threat. 
In the end, Mr Shambaugh cannot de-
cide whether the coming crackup will be
led by the party or the people. Early in the
book he notes that the major determinant
of China’s future lies with its leadership

and their choices. The party, in other
words, commands its own destiny. But he
also lists a catalogue of credible threats
from within society, including tensions
over pensions, health care and the envi-
ronment: “At some point, some—or sever-
al—of the elements…will ‘snap’,” he reck-
ons. Hong Kong, Tibet and the far western
province of Xinjiang are all tinderboxes,
with the fuses already burning. 
This sweep is both the book’s strength
and weakness: by Mr Shambaugh’s telling,
China’s problems are so many, various and
deep that it does indeed seem impossible
that the Communist Party can survive. Yet
it raises the opposite question too: what,
then, has held such an improbable regime
together for so long? 7

International Pop

Far and wide

A deeper and more international take on the Pop Art movement
WHEN John Locke wrote in 1689, “In
the beginning all the World was
America,” the English philosopher meant
an untamed wilderness populated by sav-
ages. After the second world war all the
world seemed to have become America
once more, only this time the savages were
not survivors from an almost vanished
past but the brash hucksters of an emerg-
ing present. The Soviet Union might have
competed with America militarily and
even ideologically, but when it came to the
soft power projected through high art and
low commerce, it was simply no contest. 
Pop Art was the movement that cap-
tured the post-war reality of a globe awash
in Americana hawked by Madison Ave-

nue and Hollywood dream-merchants.
But this did not mean all the art came
stamped “Made in the USA”. As a thought-
ful, ambitious exhibition at the Philadel-
phia Museum of Art demonstrates, much
of the most interesting work was created
far from American shores, by those on the
receiving end of this apparently unstoppa-
ble gusher of products, posters and propa-
ganda. “International Pop”, on view until
May 15th, brings together works by artists
from four continents to show how the
same reality could appear drastically dif-
ferent depending on where you stood. 
For the Americans themselves the out-
look was rosy, if not entirely uncritical.
Robert Indiana, creator of the iconic “Love”
image (those four stacked letters, with the
“O” gently rocking on its side), once pro-
claimed that Pop Art “is the American
Dream, optimistic, generous and naive.”
Those from countries defeated in war or
exhausted by hard-won victory, living in
permissive Western democracies or under
Latin American military dictatorships,
generally had a more jaundiced perspec-
tive on the new world order, one character-
ised as much by repulsion as attraction. 
The ﬁrst work in the show sets the tone:
“20th/21st-Century Tribute” (pictured) by
Antônio Henrique Amaral from Brazil. The
painting, from 1967, depicts four mouths in
mid-harangue superimposed over an
American ﬂag and atop what appears to be
a pile of military badges. A none-too-sub-
tle critique of military dictatorship, the
work deploys the bright colours of adver-
tising billboards to expose American com-
plicity in authoritarian repression. Even 

Set the tongues wagging

1

The Economist March 26th 2016

Books and arts 77

Johnson

Noam Chomsky

But what is it? Merge simply says that
two mental objects can be merged into a
bigger one, and mental operations can be
performed on that as if it were a single one.
The can be merged with cat to give a noun
phrase, which other grammar rules can op-
erate on as if it were a bare noun like water.
So can the and hat. Once there, you can fur-

ther merge, making the cat in the hat. The cat

in the hat can be merged with a verb phrase
to create a new object, a sentence: The cat in
the hat came back. And that sentence can
be merged into bigger sentences: You think

the cat in the hat came back. And so on.

Why would this be of any use? No one
else had Merge. Whom did Prometheus
talk to? Nobody, at least not using Merge.
(Humans may already have been using
cries and gestures, as many animals do.)
But Merge-enabled, hierarchically struc-
tured language, according to Mr Chomsky,
did not evolve for talking at all. Rather, it let
Prometheus take simple concepts and

The theories of the world’s best-known linguist have become rather weird
FEW disciplines are so strongly associat-
ed with a single ﬁgure: Einstein in
physics and Freud in psychology, per-
haps. But Noam Chomsky is the man
who revolutionised linguistics. Since he
wrote “Syntactic Structures” in 1957, Mr
Chomsky has argued that human lan-
guage is fundamentally diﬀerent from
any other kind of communication, that a
“linguist from Mars” would agree that all
human languages are variations on a sin-
gle language, and that children’s incredi-
bly quick and successful learning (despite
often messy and inattentive parental in-
put) points to an innate language faculty
in the brain. These ideas are now widely
accepted.
Over the past 60 years, Mr Chomsky
has repeatedly stripped down his theory.
Some aspects of human language are
shared with animals, and others are part
of more general human thinking. He has
focused ever more narrowly on the fea-
tures of language that he reckons are un-
ique to humans. All this has led to a re-
markable little book, published late last
year with Robert Berwick, a computer sci-
entist. “Why Only Us” purports to explain
the evolution of human language.
Other biologists,
linguists and psy-
chologists have probed the same ques-
tion and have reached little consensus.
But there is even less consensus around
the world’s most eminent linguist’s idea:
that a single genetic mutation created an
ability called “Merge”, in a single human
whom Mr Chomsky has called “Prome-
theus”, some time before the human exo-
dus from Africa. That mutation was so ad-
vantageous that it survived and thrived,
producing today’s 7,000 languages from
Albanian to Zulu. But the vast diﬀerences
among the world’s languages, Mr Chom-
sky argues, are mere diﬀerences in “exter-
nalisation”. The key is Merge.

combine them in sentence-like ways in
his own head. The resulting complex
thoughts gave him a survival advantage.
If he then passed the mutant Merge gene
on to several surviving children, who
thrived and passed on the Merge gene to
their children, Messrs Chomsky and Ber-
wick believe that they must have then
come to dominate the population of hu-
mans in Africa. Only later, as Merge came
to work with the vocal and hearing or-
gans, did human language emerge.
Many scholars ﬁnd this to be some-
where between insuﬃcient, improbable
and preposterous. The emergence of a sin-
gle mutation that gives such a big advan-
tage is derided by biologists as a “hopeful
monster” theory; most evolution is gra-
dual, operating on many genes, not one.
Some ability like Merge may exist, but this
does not explain why some words may
merge and others don’t, much less why
the world’s
languages merge
so
diﬀerently. (Not a single non-English ex-
ample appears in “Why Only Us”, nor a
single foreign language in its index.)
Mr Chomsky says those who disagree
with his ever-more contentious ideas are
either blind or hucksters. Critics refer to a
“cult” of “acolytes” around a “Great
Leader”, unwilling to challenge him or
engage seriously with the work of non-
Chomskyan scholars. (One critic has said
“to be savaged by Chomsky is a badge of
honour.”) Linguistics is now divided into
a Chomskyan camp, a large number of
critics and many more still for whom the
founder of the modern discipline is sim-
ply irrelevant. He is unlikely to end up like
Freud, a marginal ﬁgure in modern psy-
chology whose lasting inﬂuence has been
on the humanities. Mr Chomsky’s career
is more likely to end up like Einstein’s—at
least in the sense that his best and most
inﬂuential work came early on.

2

more pointed is “The Western, Christian
Civilisation”, a sculpture from 1965 by León
Ferrari of Argentina, showing Jesus cruci-
ﬁed on an American bomber. 
For those suﬀering under brutal dicta-
torship, subtlety was a luxury they could
ill aﬀord. But artists in nations newly liber-
ated from tyranny tended to be more am-
bivalent, acknowledging the allure of
American culture even as they struggled to
free themselves from its grip. Shinohara
Ushio, a Japanese artist, responded to the
ﬂood tide of American products with more
humour than outrage. “Drink More” (1964)
is a crudely slapped together assemblage

in which the title phrase is stencilled over a
canvas of the stars and stripes; a plaster
hand protrudes, grasping a bottle of Coke.
One of a series of works made for an exhi-
bition called “This is Pop!”, the badgering
slogan of the ﬁrst is countermanded by an-
other that says: “No thanks!” 
Sigmar Polke focuses as much on the
medium as on the message. “Bunnies”
(1966) reproduces a hugely enlarged photo-
graph of Playboy hostesses in grainy dots
that blur the image almost to the point of
indecipherability. Mr Polke, a German art-
ist, deploys many of the same strategies
that have been used by American artists,

such as Andy Warhol and Roy Lichten-
stein, to reveal how manufactured desire
turns people into consumers. As the signal
is overwhelmed by the noise, the systems
by which this transformation is achieved
become exposed at the very moment they
begin to break down. 
“International Pop” does not contradict
the narrative that the second half of the
20th century belonged to America. But by
telling a familiar story from multiple an-
gles, by giving as much space to the dissent-
ers as to the supporters, it enriches what
has too often been presented in simplistic
or triumphalist terms. 7

78

Courses

Appointments

The OPEC Fund for International Development (OFID)

The OPEC Fund for International Development (OFID), based in 
Vienna – Austria, is a multilateral development ﬁ nance institution 
which seeks to promote cooperation between its member states and 
developing countries as an expression of the South-South solidarity. 
It does this mainly by providing ﬁ nancial resources to assist the latter 
group of countries in their economic and social advancement.

By the end of January 2016, the level of cumulative development 
assistance extended by OFID stood approximately at US$19.1billion. 
The development assistance involves ﬁ nancial support to the public 
sector, private sector and trade ﬁ nance operations, grants, balance of 
payment support loans, as well as, HIPC initiative debt relief delivery. 
In pursuit of its organizational strengthening program, OFID has an 
opening and now seeks to ﬁ ll the vacancy of an Internal Audit Oﬃ  cer.

OFID oﬀ ers an internationally competitive remuneration and beneﬁ ts 
package, which includes tax-exempted salary, education grant for 
children, medical and accident insurance schemes, dependency 
allowance, annual leave, staﬀ  retirement beneﬁ t, diplomatic immunity 
and privileges, as applicable.

Interested applicants are 
invited 
to visit OFID’s website at 
www.oﬁ d.org for detailed descriptions of duties and required 
qualiﬁ cations as well as procedure for applications. Preference is given 
to applicants from OFID Member Countries.

The deadline for receipt of applications is April 8, 2016.

Due to expected volume of applications, OFID would only enter into 
further correspondences with short-listed candidates.

The Economist March 26th 2016

Courses

79

The Economist March 26th 2016

80

Economic and ﬁnancial indicators

The Economist March 26th 2016

Economic data

% change on year ago

Gross domestic product 
latest 
qtr* 2016† 

Industr ial 
production 
latest 

Consumer pr ices Unemployment 
latest 
2016† 
rate, % 

Current-account balance 
latest 12 
% of GDP 
months, $bn 
2016† 

Budget 
Interest
balance 
rates, %
% of GDP 10-year gov't 
2016† 
bonds, latest 

Currency units, per $
Mar 22nd 
year ago

United States +1.9 Q4 
China 
+6.8 Q4 
Japan 
+0.7 Q4 
Br itain 
+1.9 Q4 
Canada 
+0.5 Q4 
Euro area 
+1.6 Q4 
Austr ia 
+1.1 Q4 
Belgium 
+1.4 Q4 
France 
+1.4 Q4 
Germany 
+1.3 Q4 
Greece 
-0.7 Q4 
Italy 
+1.0 Q4 
Netherlands 
+1.6 Q4 
Spain 
+3.5 Q4 
Czech Republic +4.2 Q4 
Denmark 
+0.5 Q4 
Norway 
+0.1 Q4 
Poland 
+3.7 Q4 
Russia 
-4.1 Q3 
Sweden  
+4.5 Q4 
Switzerland 
+0.4 Q4 
Turkey 
+4.0 Q3 
Australia 
+3.0 Q4 
Hong Kong 
+1.9 Q4 
India 
+7.3 Q4 
Indonesia 
+5.0 Q4 
Malaysia 
+4.5 Q4 
Pakistan 
Philippines 
Singapore 
South Korea 
Taiwan 
Thailand 
Argentina 
Brazil 
Chile 
Colombia 
Mexico 
Venezuela 
Egypt 
Israel 
Saudi Arabia 
South Afr ica 

+6.3 Q4 
+1.8 Q4 
+3.0 Q4 
-0.5 Q4 
+2.8 Q4 
+2.3 Q2 
-5.9 Q4 
+1.3 Q4 
+3.3 Q4 
+2.5 Q4 
-8.8 Q4~ 
+3.0 Q3 
+2.8 Q4 
+3.4 2015 
+0.6 Q4 

+5.5 2015** 

+1.0 +2.0 
+6.6 +6.4 
-1.1 +0.8 
+1.9 +2.0 
+0.8 
+1.6 
+1.3 
+1.5 
+3.7 
+1.3 
+1.3 
+1.4 
+1.4 
+1.3 
+1.1 
+1.5 
+0.5 
+1.4 
+0.4 
+1.1 
+1.0 
+1.7 
+3.3 +2.7 
-0.2 +2.8 
+1.0 
+1.6 
-4.7 
+1.5 
+4.5 +3.5 
na 
-1.3 
+5.3 
+3.1 
+1.7 
+1.1 
na +3.2 
+2.6 +2.5 
+0.9 
+2.1 
+4.4 
+7.5 
na 
+5.1 
na +5.5 
na +4.8 
+8.2 +6.3 
+6.2 +2.8 
+2.3 +2.6 
+2.2 +2.3 
+3.2 +3.7 
+2.0 
-0.1 
-5.7 
-3.2 
+0.3 +3.4 
+2.4 +3.7 
+2.2 +2.5 
-8.4 
-7.0 
na +4.0 
+3.9 +3.7 
na +2.8 
+0.6 
+1.0 

+1.0 Feb 
+2.3 Feb 
-0.1 Jan 
+0.3 Feb 
+1.4 Feb 
-0.2 Feb 
+1.0 Feb 
+1.4 Feb 
-0.2 Feb 
nil Feb 
-0.5 Feb 
-0.3 Feb 
+0.6 Feb 
-0.8 Feb 
+0.5 Feb 
+0.3 Feb 
+3.1 Feb 
-0.8 Feb 
+8.1 Feb 
+0.4 Feb 
-0.8 Feb 
+8.8 Feb 
+1.7 Q4 
+3.1 Feb 
+5.2 Feb 
+4.4 Feb 
+3.5 Jan 
+4.0 Feb 
+0.9 Feb 
-0.6 Jan 
+1.3 Feb 
+2.4 Feb 
-0.5 Feb 

-1.0 Feb 
+5.4 Feb 
-3.8 Jan 
+0.2 Jan 
-2.2 Dec 
+2.8 Jan 
-1.7 Dec 
-0.8 Dec 
+2.0 Jan 
+2.3 Jan 
+4.6 Jan 
+3.9 Jan 
+2.8 Jan 
+0.6 Jan 
+1.0 Jan 
+1.4 Jan 
-0.6 Jan 
+6.7 Feb 
+1.1 Feb 
+4.6 Jan 
-4.5 Q4 
+3.6 Jan 
+1.9 Q4 
-1.1 Q4 
-1.5 Jan 
+3.2 Jan 
+3.3 Jan 
+5.0 Jan 
+34.3 Jan 
-0.5 Jan 
-1.9 Jan 
-5.7 Jan 
-3.3 Jan 
-2.5 Oct 
-13.8 Jan +10.4 Feb 
-8.3 Jan 
+4.7 Feb 
+8.2 Jan 
+7.6 Feb 
+1.1 Jan 
+2.9 Feb 
na  
na  
-11.4 Jan 
+9.1 Feb 
-0.7 Jan 
-0.2 Feb 
na  
+4.2 Feb 
-1.0 Jan 
+6.2 Jan 

— *** 

+1.2 
+1.6 
+0.4 
+0.7 
+1.6 
+0.4 
+1.3 
+1.1 
+0.4 
+0.6 
+0.7 
+0.4 
+0.8 
-0.1 
+1.5 
+1.0 
+2.1 
+1.7 
+8.3 
+0.9 
-0.6 
+8.3 
+2.0 
+2.6 
+5.2 
+4.4 
+2.9 
+5.4 
+2.9 
+1.3 
+1.4 
+1.0 
+2.7 
— 
+8.3 
+3.6 
+3.7 
+3.1 
+181 
+8.8 
+1.7 
+3.8 
+6.2 

4.9 Feb 
4.1 Q4§ 
3.2 Jan 

5.1 Dec†† 

7.3 Feb 
10.3 Jan 
5.9 Jan 
7.9 Jan 
10.2 Jan 
6.2 Feb 
24.0 Dec 
11.5 Jan 
7.9 Feb 
20.5 Jan 

6.3 Feb§ 

4.5 Dec 

4.5 Dec‡‡ 

10.3 Jan§ 

5.8 Feb§ 
7.6 Feb§ 

3.4 Feb 
10.8 Dec§ 
5.8 Feb 

3.3 Feb‡‡ 
4.9 2013 

6.2 Q3§ 

3.3 Dec§ 
5.9 2015 

5.8 Q1§ 
1.9 Q4 

4.9 Feb§ 

3.9 Feb 

0.9 Jan§ 

5.9 Q3§ 

7.6 Jan§ 
5.8 Jan§‡‡ 

11.9 Jan§ 
4.3 Jan 

6.0 Dec§ 

12.8 Q4§ 
5.1 Jan 

5.7 2014 

24.5 Q4§ 

-484.1 Q4 
+293.2 Q4 
+141.0 Jan 
-134.2 Q3 
-51.6 Q4 
+346.5 Jan 
+10.7 Q3 
+1.1 Sep 
-3.8 Jan‡ 
+281.5 Jan 
-0.4 Jan 
+39.5 Jan 
+74.8 Q3 
+18.3 Dec 
+1.5 Q4 
+20.6 Jan 
+35.3 Q4 
+0.2 Jan 
+65.8 Q4 
+29.2 Q4 
+75.9 Q4 
-31.9 Jan 
-56.0 Q4 
+9.7 Q4 
-22.6 Q4 
-17.8 Q4 
+8.7 Q4 
-1.6 Q4 
+8.4 Dec 
+57.5 Q4 
+106.7 Jan 
+76.2 Q4 
+34.8 Q4 
-15.9 Q4 
-51.6 Jan 
-4.8 Q4 
-18.9 Q4 
-32.4 Q4 
-17.8 Q3~ 
-14.7 Q3 
+13.8 Q4 
-35.1 Q3 
-13.6 Q4 

-2.6 
+3.0 
+3.5 
-4.2 
-2.9 
+2.8 
+1.8 
+0.8 
-0.4 
+7.6 
+2.1 
+1.8 
+9.8 
+0.9 
-0.1 
+6.2 
+11.6 
-2.1 
+3.9 
+6.1 
+9.6 
-4.6 
-4.0 
+2.6 
-1.1 
-2.4 
+2.7 
-0.9 
+3.6 
+20.4 
+7.4 
+12.3 
+2.3 
-1.9 
-2.4 
-1.4 
-5.1 
-2.7 
-1.4 
-2.0 
+4.3 
+0.1 
-4.3 

-2.5 
-3.0 
-6.2 
-3.6 
-1.4 
-1.9 
-2.0 
-2.3 
-3.5 
+0.4 
-3.9 
-2.5 
-1.6 
-3.4 
-1.6 
-2.8 
+7.2 
-1.9 
-2.2 
-0.6 
+0.3 
-1.8 
-2.0 
-0.4 
-3.7 
-1.9 
-3.7 
-4.6 
-2.1 
+0.9 
+0.5 
-0.9 
-2.1 
-2.7 
-5.4 
-1.6 
-1.9 
-3.0 
-14.4 
-9.6 
-2.5 
-8.0 
-3.3 

1.91 
2.58§§ 
-0.09 
1.54 
1.33 
0.21 
0.61 
0.57 
0.57 
0.21 
8.77 
1.26 
0.32 
1.52 
0.47 
0.50 
1.26 
2.85 
9.03 
0.84 
-0.38 
10.17 
2.60 
1.29 
7.51 
7.66 
3.83 
8.41††† 
4.77 
2.06 
1.84 
0.80 
2.02 
na 
13.71 
4.42 
8.04 
6.04 
11.18 
na 
1.91 
na 
9.30 

- 
6.49 
112 
0.70 
1.31 
0.89 
0.89 
0.89 
0.89 
0.89 
0.89 
0.89 
0.89 
0.89 
24.1 
6.64 
8.40 
3.79 
67.4 
8.22 
0.97 
2.87 
1.31 
7.75 
66.7 
13,180 
4.01 
105 
46.3 
1.36 
1,154 
32.4 
34.9 
14.3 
3.59 
675 
3,049 
17.3 
6.31 
8.88 
3.84 
3.75 
15.2 

-
6.21
120
0.67
1.26
0.93
0.93
0.93
0.93
0.93
0.93
0.93
0.93
0.93
25.5
6.91
8.04
3.83
59.3
8.64
0.98
2.58
1.29
7.76
62.5
13,116
3.73
102
44.8
1.38
1,123
31.5
32.8
8.79
3.22
633
2,587
15.1
6.29
7.63
4.06
3.75
12.0

Source: Haver Analytics.  *% change on previous quar ter, annual rate. †The Economist poll or Economist Intelligence Unit estimate/forecast. §Not seasonally adjusted. ‡New ser ies. ~2014 **Year ending June. ††Latest 
3 months. ‡‡3-month moving average. §§5-year yield. ***Of f icial number not yet proved to be reliable; The State Street Pr iceStats Inf lation Index, Februar y 34.15%; year ago 30.0% †††Dollar-denominated bonds. 

 
 
 
 
The Economist March 26th 2016 

Economic and ﬁnancial indicators 81

Markets

% change on
Dec 31st 2015
Index 
in local 
in $
one 
Mar 22nd week currency terms
United States (DJIA) 
17,582.6 
+1.9 
+0.9 
+0.9
China (SSEA) 
3,138.9 
+4.7 
-15.3 
-15.3
Japan (Nikkei 225) 
17,048.6 
-0.4 
-10.4 
-3.6
Br itain (FTSE 100) 
6,192.7 
+0.9 
-0.8 
-4.3
Canada (S&P TSX) 
13,493.5 
+0.7 
+3.7 +10.4
Euro area (FTSE Euro 100) 1,029.0 
-0.3 
-6.0 
-2.8
Euro area (EURO STOXX 50) 3,051.2 
-0.5 
-6.6 
-3.5
Austr ia (ATX) 
2,292.3 
-0.3 
-4.4 
-1.2
Belgium (Bel 20) 
3,424.9 
+0.2 
-7.4 
-4.3
France (CAC 40) 
4,432.0 
-0.9 
-4.4 
-1.2
Germany (DAX)* 
9,990.0 
+0.6 
-7.0 
-3.9
Greece (Athex Comp) 
544.3 
-6.0 
-13.8 
-10.9
Italy (FTSE/MIB) 
18,698.8 
-0.4 
-12.7 
-9.8
Netherlands (AEX) 
443.1 
+0.3 
+0.3 
+3.7
Spain (Madr id SE) 
907.9 
-0.1 
-5.9 
-2.8
Czech Republic (PX) 
901.1 
-1.0 
-5.8 
-2.7
Denmark (OMXCB) 
848.9 
-2.3 
-6.4 
-3.1
Hungary (BUX) 
25,878.6 
+1.1 
+8.2 +13.4
Norway (OSEAX) 
639.2 
+1.5 
-1.5 
+3.7
Poland (WIG) 
48,166.8 
+2.2 
+3.7 
+7.9
Russia (RTS, $ terms) 
889.0 
+8.2 
+8.3 
+17.4
Sweden (OMXS30)
1,382.4
-1.5
-4.4
-2.0
Switzerland (SMI)
7,853.1
-1.3
-10.9
-8.2
Turkey (BIST) 
81,766.1 
+3.5 
+14.0 +16.0
Australia (All Ord.) 
5,230.8 
+1.2 
-2.1 
+2.5
Hong Kong (Hang Seng) 20,666.8 
+1.9 
-5.7 
-5.7
India (BSE) 
25,330.5 
+3.2 
-3.0 
-3.9
Indonesia (JSX) 
4,856.1 
+0.1 
+5.7 +10.6
Malaysia (KLSE) 
1,724.8 
+2.0 
+1.9 
+9.2
Pakistan (KSE) 
32,928.3 
+0.9 
+0.3 
+0.4
Singapore (STI)
2,880.7
+1.5
-0.1
+4.1
South Korea (KOSPI)
1,996.8
+1.4
+1.8
+3.4
Taiwan (TWI)
8,785.7
+2.0
+5.4
+6.9
Thailand (SET) 
1,397.2 
+1.0 
+8.5 +11.8
Argentina (MERV) 
12,926.3 
+7.0 
+10.7 
+0.2
Brazil (BVSP) 
51,010.2 
+8.2 
+17.7 +29.8
Chile (IGPA) 
19,335.5 
+2.5 
+6.5 +11.8
Colombia (IGBC) 
9,743.4 
+2.6 
+14.0 +18.7
Mexico (IPC) 
45,632.3 
+3.2 
+6.2 
+5.8
Venezuela (IBC) 
14,951.3 
-2.2 
+2.5 
na
Egypt (Case 30) 
7,430.3 
+4.1 
+6.1 
-6.5
Israel (TA-100) 
1,279.9 
+0.7 
-2.7 
-1.5
Saudi Arabia (Tadawul) 
6,481.7 
+4.0 
-6.2 
-6.1
South Afr ica (JSE AS) 
53,392.9 
+2.2 
+5.3 
+7.3

Poland marks 20 years of OECD membership

GDP, % change on a year earlier

GDP per person, constant PPP†, OECD=100

Poland

OECD average

8
6
4
2
0
2
4

+
–

Slovenia

Czech Rep.

Slovakia

Poland

90
80
70
60
50
40

2002

04

06

08

10

12

14

16*

2002

04

06

08

10

12

14

Unemployment rate, %

Working-age population, % change 2015-60

Poland

OECD average

2002

04

06

08

10

12

14

16*

Source: OECD

Other markets

% change on
Dec 31st 2015
Index 
in local 
in $
one 
Mar 22nd week currency terms
United States (S&P 500) 
2,049.8 
+1.7 
+0.3 
+0.3
United States (NAScomp) 4,821.7 
+2.0 
-3.7 
-3.7
China (SSEB, $ terms) 
372.1 
+3.9 
-12.7 
-12.7
Japan (Topix) 
1,369.9 
-0.2 
-11.5 
-4.8
Europe (FTSEurof irst 300) 1,338.2 
-0.2 
-6.9 
-3.8
World, dev'd (MSCI) 
1,643.6 
+1.5 
-1.2 
-1.2
Emerging markets (MSCI) 
830.5 
+5.0 
+4.6 
+4.6
World, all (MSCI) 
397.0 
+1.9 
-0.6 
-0.6
World bonds (Citigroup) 
924.2 
+1.4 
+6.2 
+6.2
EMBI+ (JPMorgan) 
745.6 
+1.9 
+5.9 
+5.9
Hedge funds (HFRX) 
1,148.4§ 
+0.5 
-2.2 
-2.2
Volatility, US (VIX) 
14.2 +16.8 
+18.2 (levels)
CDSs, Eur (iTRAXX)† 
72.9 
-5.4 
-5.4 
-2.3
CDSs, N Am (CDX)† 
80.6 
-6.0 
-8.7 
-8.7
Carbon trading (EU ETS) € 
4.8 
-2.8 
-41.7 
-39.8

Sources: Markit; Thomson Reuters.  *Total return index. 
†Credit-default-swap spreads, basis points. §Mar 21st.

Indicators for more countr ies and additional
ser ies, go to: Economist.com/indicators

40

20

–

0

+

20

40

20

15

10

5

0

Poland
Japan
Italy
OECD average
Br itain
United States
Mexico
Australia

*Forecast    †At purchasing-power par ity

The Economist commodity-pr ice index

2005=100

% change on
one 
one
Mar 15th Mar 21st* month 
year

129.8 
150.6 

108.1 
112.4 
106.3 

Dollar Index
All Items 
Food 
Industr ials 
 All 
 Nfa† 
 Metals 
Sterling Index
All items 
Euro Index
All items 
Gold
$ per oz 
1,252.5 
West Texas Intermediate
$ per barrel 
36.5 

166.6 

145.2 

132.0 
152.8 

110.3 
115.8 
107.9 

+4.7 
+5.2 

+4.0 
+7.0 
+2.7 

-8.5
-4.8

-13.2
-4.2
-16.9

166.6 

+2.6 

-5.5

145.7 

+2.5 

-11.3

1,246.1 

+1.7 

+4.7

40.0 

+33.6 

-14.7

Sources: Bloomberg; CME Group; Cotlook; Darmenn & Curl; FT; ICCO;
ICO; ISO; Live Rice Index; LME; NZ Wool Ser vices; Thompson Lloyd & 
Ewar t; Thomson Reuters; Urner Barr y; WSJ.  *Provisional  
†Non-food agr iculturals.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
82

Obituar y Hilar y Putnam

The meaning of meaning

Hilary Putnam, a philosopher, died on March 13th, aged 89
TO BE identiﬁed with a distinctive posi-
tion is an academic career’s crowning
achievement. Hilary Putnam did better
than that: his intellectual odyssey meant
that on some of the most important contro-
versies in modern philosophy he had de-
ﬁned and defended positions on both
sides of the argument. 
His Socratic self-questioning was nota-
ble, but his hallmark was thought experi-
ments. He posited iron-willed, poker-faced
Spartans to show that pain was not just
about expression. To prove that meaning
in language was not solely about what is
intended, he proposed identical twins liv-
ing on identical planets, which diﬀered
only in that water on one of them was not
H2O but another substance with similar
properties. Each twin would refer to “wa-
ter”, intending the same meaning—but
they would be referring to diﬀerent things. 
By modern, hyper-specialised academ-
ic standards Mr Putnam ranged widely. His
work included logic, ethics, metaphysics,
political thought, mathematics, and the
philosophy of science, of mind, of eco-
nomics, of literature, of language and of re-
ligion. His early stance was that if humans
can be said to have mental states, then it is
impossible to say that machines do not.
This was the basis of what became known
as functionalism—the idea that what mat-

ters about mental states is what they do,
not what they are made of. 
Over time he became less keen on
thinking of the mind only in terms of what
happens inside the brain. Instead he
adopted externalism: “meanings just ain’t
in the head”. Reﬁning Wittgenstein, he pos-
ited a linguistic division of labour, analo-
gous to Adam Smith’s thinking in econom-
ics. The people best able to determine a
word’s meaning do so on the basis of ex-
pertise. Others then rely on their usage. As
a Harvard philosopher, he might have no
idea how to tell an elm from a beech, but
he could conﬁdently use the words with
the assurance that botanists knew exactly
what they meant. 
A related example of the tension be-
tween knowledge and reality came with
another thought experiment: a sceptic
might wonder whether she were no more
than a brain in a vat, artiﬁcially nourished,
and stimulated with a bogus but utterly
convincing version of the real world. How
could one prove that this is not so? The an-
swer is that our brains are more than just
perception machines, and meaning de-
pends on what other people think too. So a
brain in a vat might exist, but it could not
meaningfully say that it was merely a brain
in a vat. Philosophers would call that epis-
temological externalism: factors outside

The Economist March 26th 2016

the mind are crucial to what it can be said
to “know” and “think”. 
Many saw parallels between that con-
troversy and “The Matrix”, a successful
Hollywood ﬁlm which bridged science ﬁc-
tion and philosophy. It portrayed a dysto-
pia in which machines have subdued hu-
mans by trapping them in a simulated
reality while their bodies languish in vats. 
Mr Putnam was surprised and ﬂattered
by the ﬁlm-makers’ interest. He was not a
populariser, liking the quip: “any philoso-
phy that can be put in a nutshell belongs in
one.” But he wanted philosophy to relate
to the real world. It should ﬁt the complex-
ity of human existence and civilisation,
and not the other way round.

Reloaded
That was a reaction to the arid logical posi-
tivism he was taught as a student—the idea,
once dominant in the English-speaking ac-
ademic world, that philosophy is really a
branch of science and that the only knowl-
edge that matters is what can be empirical-
ly veriﬁed. One of his famous courses at
Harvard was a direct challenge to the logi-
cal positivist approach: it featured “non-
scientiﬁc knowledge”, exploring the phi-
losophy of aesthetics and ethics.
In his case involvement in the real
world mostly took the form of left-wing
politics, where his views were almost as
versatile as his philosophy. Born to com-
munist parents (his father was a columnist
for the Daily Worker), he lived in a com-
mune, campaigning against the Vietnam
war and joining the Progressive Labour
Party, an exotic outﬁt for those who found
the Communist Party too staid. He would
stand outside factory gates in the early
morning, trying to sell magazines and to
discuss politics with the workers. He baf-
ﬂed his students by sitting among them
during lectures, though later he took to the
podium to brandish Mao’s “Little Red
Book”. Harvard tolerated him more than
he tolerated disagreement: he disrupted a
colleague’s lectures because researching
inherited intelligence was racist. 
He later recanted his communism, and
also his fervent secularism (he once dis-
missed an Oxford philosopher’s argument
that no machine could be an adequate rep-
resentation of the mind with the scornful
put-down: “If I believed that, I would have
to be not only a Theist but an Episcopa-
lian”). Yet the ﬁnal great enthusiasm of his
life was Judaism. He and his wife Ruth
Anna were determined to recover the iden-
tity that his parents’ generation had reject-
ed, and they created a Jewish household
for their children. Mr Putnam himself had
his own bar mitzvah in 1994, aged 68. He
learned Hebrew, and wrote a book on Jew-
ish philosophy as a guide to life: seeking
proof, he argued, missed the point of reli-
gion. It was what it did that mattered. 7

gift subscription for €124
Give a six month 

Not everyone gets it, 
ensure they do

A g if t subscr ipt ion to The Economist is guaranteed to g ive your colleagues, 
f r iends or family a r ich perspec t ive on global af fairs. 

Get them started at

subscr ipt ions.economist.com/xnew or call +44(0)114 220 2404 and quote code JBK8

Wa tch Xav ier Do lan’s exc lus ive in ter v iew a t lou isvu i t ton .com .

