General Motors roars back

Sequencing the world’s genomes

Turkey’s gamble in Syria

Skiing goes downhill

JANUARY 27TH– FEBRUARY 2ND 2018

The g row ing threat of g reat-power con f l ic t

A SPECIAL REPORT

Contents

The Economist Januar y 27th 2018 3

The Amer icas
33 Brazil

Lula’s last stand?

34 Honduras

A tarnished presidency

34 Jamaica

Bad lotter y vybz

35 Bello

How the middle class votes

Middle East and Afr ica
36 The war in Syr ia (1)

Turkey moves in

37 The war in Syr ia (2)

Precar ious Rojava

38 Palestinian refugees

Str ipping the Str ip

38 Afr ican currencies

Franc exchange

39 Integr ity idols

Good clean enter tainment

39 Political pr isoners 
in Ethiopia

Setting them free

40 South Afr ica’s land reform

How not to do it

Special report: 
The future of war
New battlegrounds

Af ter page 40

Europe
41 Welfare

Battle of the beneﬁts

43 Italy’s Lega Nord

League of sceptics

44 Ukraine and Russia

Calling a bully a bully

44 Finland’s president

Mr Congeniality

46 Charlemagne

Torn over Tehran

Br itain
47 The politics of tax

Sacred cows no more

48 Northern Ireland

A little more conversation

49 Bagehot

The Midlands engine

6 The world this week

Leaders
9 The future of conﬂict

The next war

10 Work-place arbitration

Shut out by the small pr int

11 Land in South Afr ica

Don’t do as Mugabe did

11 Investment banks

Sorpasso on the Street

12 Trade tar iﬀs

Duties call

Letters
14 On Donald Trump, ethnic
minor ities, Singapore,
airports

Br ieﬁng
17 Amer ica and North Korea

Face oﬀ

Asia
21 Caste prejudice in India

Unconscionable

22 North Korea’s
conglomerates

From planes to mackerel

23 The Rohingya diaspora

Unwanted ever ywhere

24 Banyan

Asia: champion of free trade

China
25 Personal data

Pr ivacy in per il

26 Chinese rap

No swear ing or else

United States
27 Shutdown politics

Power oﬀ

28 The federal budget

Busted

29 Drug traﬃcking

The powder room

29 Gerr ymander ing

Say goodbye to Goofy

30 Thr ift and proﬁt

Dollar General

31 Race and horses

Rodeo dr ive

32 Lexington

The EPA

Washington shutdown A br ief

government closure revealed
deep splits among Democrats
and an increasingly poisonous
debate over immigration,
page 27. Amer ica’s budget
process swallows time but
achieves too little, page 28

EU welfare Populists are
winning votes by oﬀer ing
more generous welfare. How
can mainstream par ties
respond? Page 41

Syr ia Turkey’s oﬀensive
against the Kurds complicates
an already chaotic war, page 36.
Can the Kurds keep control of
their terr itor y? Page 37

1

Contents continues overleaf

On the cover
Shifts in geopolitics and
technology are renewing the
threat of great-power conﬂict:
leader, page 9. War is still a
contest of wills, but its
character is changing, argues
Matthew Symonds. See our
special report after page 40.
Hope that Donald Trump is
bluﬃng over North Korea,
but do not count on it, page 17

The Economist online

Daily analysis and opinion to
supplement the pr int edition, plus
audio and video, and a daily char t
Economist.com
E-mail: newsletters and
mobile edition
Economist.com/email
Pr int edition: available online by
7pm London time each Thursday
Economist.com/pr int
Audio edition: available online 
to download each Fr iday
Economist.com/audioedition

Volume 426 Number 9076

Published since September 1843

to take par t in "a severe contest between 
intelligence, which presses forward, and 
an unwor thy, timid ignorance obstructing 
our progress."

Editorial oﬃces in London and also:

Beijing, Berlin, Brussels, Cairo, Chicago, Madr id,
Mexico City, Moscow, Mumbai, Nairobi, New Delhi,
New York, Par is, San Francisco, São Paulo, Seoul,
Shanghai, Singapore, Tokyo, Washington DC

4 Contents

The Economist Januar y 27th 2018

Science and technology
66 Genomics

Sequencing the world

67 Ethnomusicology

Beyond Babel

68 Medicine

Liver in a box

69 Supersonic ﬂight

Boom boxed

Books and arts
70 Political thought

Why liberalism failed

71 Democracy in Amer ica

The Trump train

72 Profane language

Swear ing is good for you

73 The second world war

A lost memoir, now found

73 John Ashber y

Wordsmith

76 Economic and ﬁnancial
indicators

Statistics on 42 economies,
plus a closer look at the
world’s r ichest football
clubs

Obituar y
78 Paul Bocuse

The maker of chefs

International
50 Winter sports

Skiing goes downhill

Business
53 The car industr y

General Uber-Motors

54 Qualcomm’s woes

A ﬁne habit

55 WhatsApp

Zuckerberg’s other
headache

55 Luxur y goods

Online, upmarket

56 The avocado market

Lack of guac

57 Arbitration agreements

Kept out of the cour thouse

58 Schumpeter

GE’s accounts

Finance and economics
59 Morgan Stanley

Tediously does it

60 Buttonwood

Volatility’s eer ie absence

61 Microﬁnance

Bucks af ter the bang

61 European lending

Avoiding the banks

62 Niger ia’s economy

Central-banker shor tage

63 Poverty and migration

Bangladeshi exper iment

63 Hyper inﬂation

Bolívar blues

64 Free exchange

Regulating ﬁnance

Skiing Global warming and
ageing populations pose a
double threat to winter spor ts.
The industr y’s response is
making it all worse, page 50

Amer ican giants GM takes an

unexpected lead in the race to
develop autonomous vehicles,
page 53. If they are to save the
ﬁrm, GE’s bosses and board
need better information:
Schumpeter, page 58

Investment banks The battle

between Morgan Stanley and
Goldman Sachs is a parable of
post-cr isis ﬁnance: leader,
page 11. Morgan’s recover y is a
huge achievement with, so far,
modest results, page 59.
Volatility has been low, and
that encourages r isk-taking:
Buttonwood, page 60. Blame
recurr ing ﬁnancial cr ises on
the political temptations of
deregulation: Free exchange,
page 64

Gene mapping An ambitious

eﬀor t to map, store and
disseminate genetic
information about much of life
on Ear th gets under way, 
page 66

Subscription service

For our full range of subscription offers, 
including digital only or print and digital 
combined visit
Economist.com/offers
You can subscribe or renew your subscription 
by mail, telephone or fax at the details below:
Telephone: +65 6534 5166 
Facsimile: +65 6534 5066
Web: 
Economist.com/offers
E-mail: 
Post: 

Asia@subscriptions.economist.com

The Economist 
Subscription Centre,
Tanjong Pagar Post Office
PO Box 671
Singapore 910817 

Subscription for 1 year (51 issues)Print only

Australia 
China 
Hong Kong & Macau 
India 
Japan 
Korea 
Malaysia 
New Zealand 
Singapore & Brunei 
Taiwan 
Thailand 
Other countries 

A$465
CNY 2,300
HK$2,300
 10,000
Yen 44,300
KRW 375,000
RM 780
NZ$530
S$425
NT$9,000
US$300
Contact us as above

Pr incipal commercial oﬃces:

The Adelphi Building, 1-11 John Adam Street,

London WC2N 6HT

Tel: +44 (0) 20 7830 7000
Rue de l’Athénée 32
1206 Geneva, Switzerland
Tel: +41 22 566 2470 
750 3rd Avenue, 5th Floor, New York, NY 10017 
Tel: +1 212 541 0500 
1301 Cityplaza Four,
12 Taikoo Wan Road, Taikoo Shing, Hong Kong
Tel: +852 2585 3888

Other commercial oﬃces:

Chicago, Dubai, Frankfur t, Los Angeles,
Par is, San Francisco and Singapore 

PEFC certiﬁed
This copy of The Economist
is pr inted on paper sourced
from sustainably managed
forests, recycled and controlled
sources cer tiﬁed by PEFC
www.pefc.org

PEFC/01-31-162

© 2018 The Economist Newspaper Limited. All r ights reser ved. Neither this publication nor any par t of it may be reproduced, stored in a retr ieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or
otherwise, without the pr ior permission of The Economist Newspaper Limited. Published ever y week, except for a year-end double issue, by The Economist Newspaper Limited. The Economist is a registered trademark of The Economist Newspaper Limited.
Publisher: The Economist. Pr inted by Times Pr inters (in Singapore).
M.C.I. (P) No.057/09/2017 PPS 677/11/2012(022861)

 
 
 
 
6

The world this week

The Economist Januar y 27th 2018

Politics

Backed by air strikes, Turkish
troops attacked the Syrian
region of Afrin, which is con-
trolled by a Kurdish militia
allied with America. Recep
Tayyip Erdogan, the Turkish
president, said Turkey will
extend its oﬀensive to the
town of Manbij, which could
bring it into direct conﬂict with
American troops in the area.

Abdel-Fattah al-Sisi, Egypt’s
president, said he would run
for re-election. He won’t face
much competition. Under
pressure from the government,
the last two major challengers
called oﬀ their campaigns.

Olusegun Obasanjo, a former
president of Nigeria, called on
the current president, Muham-
madu Buhari, not to run for a
second term next year. It is the
strongest signal yet that Mr
Buhari may fail to garner
enough support to win his
party’s nomination. 

A former warlord in the
Central African Republic was
jailed after a conviction for his
involvement in multiple mur-
ders. It is the ﬁrst such convic-
tion since a coup in 2012.

Shut and open

America’s government was
brieﬂy shut down after Demo-
crats and Republicans failed to
agree on a spending bill. They
eventually reached a compro-
mise that promises a vote on
the fate of the “DREAMers”,
migrants who came to Ameri-
ca illegally as children. Many
Democrats opposed the com-
promise, which funds the
government only until Febru-
ary 8th, fearing they had given
up a bargaining chip.

Pennsylvania’s Supreme
Court found that the bound-
aries of the state’s congressio-
nal districts had been conﬁg-
ured to favour Republicans
and ordered that they be re-
drawn soon for this year’s
mid-term elections. It is the
second time this year that a
state has been found explicitly
to have gerrymandered its
congressional map along
partisan lines (the other state
being North Carolina). 

Patrick Meehan, a Republican
congressman from Pennsylva-
nia, was removed from the
House Ethics Committee,
which has been investigating
claims of sexual harassment,
following an allegation that he
had used public money to
settle claims of misconduct
brought by a former aide. 

She’s not quite there yet

Delegates from Germany’s
Social Democratic Party nar-
rowly endorsed an outline
coalition agreement with
Angela Merkel’s Christian
Democrats. A month of de-
tailed negotiations will now
start, but a formal agreement
will still have to be endorsed
by a postal ballot of all party
members. That remains a big
obstacle.

The Speaker of Catalonia’s
parliament proposed that
Carles Puigdemont be reap-
pointed as leader of the re-
gion’s government, threat-
ening a fresh crisis with Spain,
as he is in exile and faces arrest
for sedition if he returns.

In Paris the River Seine burst
its banks following exception-
ally heavy rains. There are
fears that water levels in the
French capital could exceed
those of 2016, when the city
endured serious ﬂooding. 

Sinn Fein’s new president will
be Mary Lou McDonald, who
will replace Gerry Adams
when he steps down at a party
meeting in February. Ms Mc-
Donald is an MP in Ireland’s
parliament (the nationalist
party’s leader in Northern
Ireland is Michelle O’Neill). 

Down, but not out?

A federal appeals court in
Brazil upheld the conviction
by a lower court of the former
president, Luiz Inácio Lula da
Silva, on charges of corruption
and money-laundering. Lula is
the early front-runner in Bra-
zil’s presidential election, to be
held in October, but the ap-
peals court’s decision may bar
him from running. He says he
is innocent and that the char-
ges are politically motivated. 

Bolivia’s president, Evo
Morales, said he will ask the
legislative assembly to repeal
the new criminal code after
weeks of protests by doctors
and other groups against it.
The law punishes medical
workers guilty of malpractice
with jail sentences of up to
nine years.

Venezuela’s constituent as-
sembly, a body created to
bypass the opposition-con-
trolled legislature, announced
that presidential elections will
be held by the end of April.
Although the government is
responsible for hyperinﬂation
and shortages of basic goods,
the president, Nicolás Maduro,
is expected to win re-election.
The government has banned
the most popular opposition
leaders from running for oﬃce. 

No place like home

Bangladesh delayed the start
of the planned repatriation of
Rohingya refugees to Myan-
mar, on the ground that it had
not compiled a list of those
ready to return. It is not clear
how many of the 650,000
Rohingyas who ﬂed an army-
backed pogrom want to go
home, or whether they would
be safe if they did so.

In two separate incidents,
Islamic militants stormed an
expensive hotel in Kabul and
the oﬃces of Save the

Children, a charity, in the city
of Jalalabad, killing 27 people
in total. Save the Children
suspended its operations in
Afghanistan in response. 

America imposed sanctions
on various Chinese and North
Korean companies and indi-
viduals it said were helping
North Korea’s nuclear pro-
gramme. America and Japan
also named several ships that
they said were helping the
North evade restrictions on its
oil imports.

A Swedish citizen, Gui Minhai,
was seized in China by plain-
clothes police in the presence
of Swedish diplomats who
were escorting him on a train.
Mr Gui was among ﬁve Hong
Kong-based booksellers who
were snatched by Chinese
agents in 2015. He was released
last October, with restrictions
on his movement, and was
reportedly on his way to
Beijing for a medical examina-
tion at the Swedish embassy. 

China said 17.2m Chinese
babies were born in 2017,
about 630,000 fewer than the
year before. The drop occurred
despite the ending in 2016 of
the country’s long-standing
and highly coercive one-child-
per-couple policy and its re-
placement by a limit of two
children for most families. 

Researchers in China created
two cloned monkeys using
the nuclear-transfer technique
employed to make Dolly the
sheep. Previous monkey
clones have been created by
embryo splitting, an easier
trick. Until now, nuclear trans-
fer has not worked in primates.
Its success this time is leading
to speculation that humans
will be next.

1

The Economist Januar y 27th 2018 

The world this week 7

Paul Romer resigned as chief
economist at the World Bank.
His two-year tenure was a
rocky one. Mr Romer had
chided staﬀ for their poor
grammar and overuse of the
word “and”, for example, and
was recently embroiled in a
row with staﬀ about the
methodology behind the
bank’s annual ease of doing
business report. 

The American Senate con-
ﬁrmed Jerome Powell as the
next chairman of the Federal
Reserve. He will take over from
Janet Yellen on February 3rd.
The 84-13 vote in favour of Mr
Powell was a wider margin of
support than that for Ms Yellen
four years ago, although sever-
al big hitters from both parties
voted against him, including
Elizabeth Warren, Ted Cruz
and Marco Rubio. 

Puerto Rico’s governor, Ricar-
do Rosselló, proposed privatis-
ing the island’s crippled and
debt-laden electricity ﬁrm. Last
year Mr Rosselló intervened to
stop the utility, known as
Prepa, from falling under the
control of the federal oversight
board that has been appointed
to manage Puerto Rico’s bank-
ruptcy. That was before Hurri-
cane Maria. A third of homes
and businesses are still
without power. 

The European Commission
imposed a €997m ($1.2bn) ﬁne
on Qualcomm for paying
money to Apple between 2011
and 2016 with the aim of entic-
ing it to place Qualcomm’s
chips in all iPhones and iPads.
It is the latest in a number of
hefty antitrust penalties levied
by various jurisdictions on
Qualcomm, which is also
tussling with Apple for alleg-
edly overcharging for its intel-
lectual-property licences. 

There was no let up in General
Electric’s misery. The troubled
conglomerate reported a loss
of $9.8bn for the fourth quar-
ter, as it booked a previously
announced charge to its insur-
ance business and took a
$3.5bn hit because of tax re-
form. It also revealed that the
Securities and Exchange Com-
mission is investigating its
accounting practices. 

Britain’s competition regulator
concluded that the bid by
Rupert Murdoch’s 21st
Century Fox to take full con-
trol of Sky, Britain’s premier
subscription-TV broadcaster,
would hand the Murdoch
family “too much inﬂuence
over public opinion and the
political agenda”. Regulators
may feel diﬀerently once Sky,
and speciﬁcally its news chan-
nel, is in the hands of Disney,

which is buying 21st Century
Fox’s entertainment assets,
including its stake in Sky. 

In its biggest deal for 17 years,
American International
Group agreed to pay $5.6bn for
Validus, a reinsurer based in
Bermuda. AIG today is a much
leaner insurance company
than before the ﬁnancial crisis;
its acquisition of Validus sig-
nals the end of a long period of
retrenchment for the ﬁrm. 

The road ahead

Tesla Motors put forward a
new ten-year pay deal for Elon
Musk that links his compensa-
tion to very ambitious perfor-
mance benchmarks. The boss
of the electric-car company
receives no salary, but he could
be awarded up to $55bn in
share options if—a very big
if—Tesla’s market value grows
to $650bn, from the $58bn it is
worth today. 

As part of its restructuring
process, Toys ‘R’ Us revealed
that it will close around 180 of
its 880 stores in America.
Children outside the United
States will be happy to hear
that the company has no plans
to close its more than 700
international stores, for now. 

Other economic data and news
can be found on pages 76-77

Business

The Trump administration
dismayed advocates of free
trade by slapping punitive
tariﬀs on American imports of
solar panels and washing
machines, and defended the
move as a way to protect
American manufacturers
threatened by cheap Asian
goods. Chinese oﬃcials de-
scribed the duties as a “mis-
use” of trade sanctions, but
held back from imposing
retaliatory measures. Mean-
while, 11 countries that border
the Paciﬁc, including Japan,
Canada and Australia, agreed
on the ﬁnal draft of a free-trade
pact, from which Mr Trump
withdrew America during his
early days in oﬃce.

Quids in

Dollars per pound

Brexit vote

1.8

1.6

1.4

1.2

2014

15

16

17 18

Source: Thomson Reuters

The pound breached $1.40 for
the ﬁrst time since June 2016,
when Britain’s vote to leave
the EU prompted a sell-oﬀ in
the currency. Sterling has risen
against the dollar because
markets are more optimistic
that Brexit won’t end messily;
the greenback has been falling
steadily since Donald Trump
came to power. Steven Mnu-
chin, the treasury secretary,
welcomed a weak dollar,
saying it would improve
American trade prospects.
After he made the remark the
dollar fell to a three-year low
against a basket of currencies.

The IMF issued an unusually
upbeat assessment of the
world economy, highlighting
“notable upside surprises” in
Europe and Asia that have
helped lead to “the broadest
synchronised global growth
upsurge since 2010”. It revised
its forecast upwards for world
GDP growth in 2018 and 2019 to
3.9% for both years.

LET’S BUILD A 
BETTER WORLD  
FOR INVESTING. 
LET’S MEASURE UP.

Let’s make the financial world as diverse as the one we live in. 
Let’s put ethics at the heart of everything we do.
Let’s always put investors’ needs above our own.
Let’s deliver real value for the investment fees we charge.
Let’s create jobs, build bridges, ensure prosperity.

Let’s do our part. Let’s start today. Let’s measure up.

Get started at letsmeasureup.org 

© 2018 CFA Institute. All rights reserved.

 
Leaders

The next war

The Economist Januar y 27th 2018 9

Shifts in geopolitics and technology are renewing the threat of great-power conﬂict
IN THE past 25 years war has
claimed too many lives. Yet
even as civil and religious strife
have raged in Syria, central Afri-
ca, Afghanistan and Iraq, a dev-
astating clash between 
the
world’s great powers has re-
mained almost unimaginable.
No longer. Last week the Pentagon issued a new national
defence strategy that put China and Russia above jihadism as
the main threat to America. This week the chief of Britain’s
general staﬀ warned of a Russian attack. Even now America
and North Korea are perilously close to a conﬂict that risks
dragging in China or escalating into nuclear catastrophe.
As our special report this week on the future of war argues,
powerful, long-term shifts in geopolitics and the proliferation
of new technologies are eroding the extraordinary military
dominance that America and its allies have enjoyed. Conﬂict
on a scale and intensity not seen since the second world war is
once again plausible. The world is not prepared. 

The pity of war
The pressing danger is of war on the Korean peninsula, per-
haps this year. Donald Trump has vowed to prevent Kim Jong
Un, North Korea’s leader, from being able to strike America
with nuclear-armed ballistic missiles, a capability that recent
tests suggest he may have within months, if not already.
Among many contingency plans, the Pentagon is considering
a disabling pre-emptive strike against the North’s nuclear sites.
Despite low conﬁdence in the success of such a strike, it must
be prepared to carry out the president’s order should he give it.
Even a limited attack could trigger all-out war. Analysts
reckon that North Korean artillery can bombard Seoul, the
South Korean capital, with 10,000 rounds a minute. Drones,
midget submarines and tunnelling commandos could deploy
biological, chemical and even nuclear weapons. Tens of thou-
sands of people would perish; many more if nukes were used.
This newspaper has argued that the prospect of such horror
means that, if diplomacy fails, North Korea should be con-
tained and deterred instead. Although we stand by our argu-
ment, war is a real possibility (see page 17). Mr Trump and his
advisers may conclude that a nuclear North would be so reck-
less, and so likely to cause nuclear proliferation, that it is better
to risk war on the Korean peninsula today than a nuclear strike
on an American city tomorrow.
Even if China stays out of a second Korean war, both it and
Russia are entering into a renewal of great-power competition
with the West. Their ambitions will be even harder to deal
with than North Korea’s. Three decades of unprecedented eco-
nomic growth have provided China with the wealth to trans-
form its armed forces, and given its leaders the sense that their
moment has come. Russia, paradoxically, needs to assert itself
now because it is in long-term decline. Its leaders have spent
heavily to restore Russia’s hard power, and they are willing to
take risks to prove they deserve respect and a seat at the table. 
Both countries have beneﬁted from the international order

that America did most to establish and guarantee. But they see
its pillars—universal human rights, democracy and the rule of
law—as an imposition that excuses foreign meddling and un-
dermines their own legitimacy. They are now revisionist states
that want to challenge the status quo and look at their regions
as spheres of inﬂuence to be dominated. For China, that means
East Asia; for Russia, eastern Europe and Central Asia. 
Neither China nor Russia wants a direct military confronta-
tion with America that they would surely lose. But they are us-
ing their growing hard power in other ways, in particular by ex-
ploiting a “grey zone” where aggression and coercion work just
below the level that would risk military confrontation with
the West. In Ukraine Russia has blended force, misinforma-
tion, inﬁltration, cyberwar and economic blackmail in ways
that democratic societies cannot copy and ﬁnd hard to rebuﬀ.
China is more cautious, but it has claimed, occupied and garri-
soned reefs and shoals in disputed waters. 
China and Russia have harnessed military technologies in-
vented by America, such as long-range precision-strike and
electromagnetic-spectrum warfare, to raise the cost of inter-
vention against them dramatically. Both have used asymmet-
ric-warfare strategies to create “anti-access/area denial” net-
works. China aims to push American naval forces far out into
the Paciﬁc where they can no longer safely project power into
the East and South China Seas. Russia wants the world to
know that, from the Arctic to the Black Sea, it can call on greater
ﬁrepower than its foes—and that it will not hesitate to do so.
If America allows China and Russia to establish regional
hegemonies, either consciously or because its politics are too
dysfunctional to muster a response, it will have given them a
green light to pursue their interests by brute force. When that
was last tried, the result was the ﬁrst world war.
Nuclear weapons, largely a source of stability since 1945,
may add to the danger. Their command-and-control systems
are becoming vulnerable to hacking by new cyber-weapons or
“blinding” of the satellites they depend on. A country under
such an attack could ﬁnd itself under pressure to choose be-
tween losing control of its nuclear weapons or using them. 

Vain citadels
What should America do? Almost 20 years of strategic drift has
played into the hands of Russia and China. George W. Bush’s
unsuccessful wars were a distraction and sapped support at
home for America’s global role. Barack Obama pursued a for-
eign policy of retrenchment, and was openly sceptical about
the value of hard power. Today, Mr Trump says he wants to
make America great again, but is going about it in exactly the
wrong way. He shuns multilateral organisations, treats alli-
ances as unwanted baggage and openly admires the authori-
tarian leaders of America’s adversaries. It is as if Mr Trump
wants America to give up defending the system it created and
to join Russia and China as just another truculent revisionist
power instead. 
America needs to accept that it is a prime beneﬁciary of the
international system and that it is the only power with the
ability and the resources to protect it from sustained attack. 

1

10 Leaders

The Economist Januar y 27th 2018

2 The soft power of patient and consistent diplomacy is vital,
but must be backed by the hard power that China and Russia
respect. America retains plenty of that hard power, but it is fast
losing the edge in military technology that inspired conﬁdence
in its allies and fear in its foes.
To match its diplomacy, America needs to invest in new sys-
tems based on robotics, artiﬁcial intelligence, big data and di-
rected-energy weapons. Belatedly, Mr Obama realised that
America required a concerted eﬀort to regain its technological
lead, yet there is no guarantee that it will be the ﬁrst to inno-

vate. Mr Trump and his successors need to redouble the eﬀort. 
The best guarantor of world peace is a strong America. For-
tunately, it still enjoys advantages. It has rich and capable al-
lies, still by far the world’s most powerful armed forces, unri-
valled war-ﬁghting experience, the best systems engineers and
the world’s leading tech ﬁrms. Yet those advantages could all
too easily be squandered. Without America’s commitment to
the international order and the hard power to defend it against
determined and able challengers, the dangers will grow. If
they do, the future of war could be closer than you think. 7

Mandator y arbitration in Amer ica

Shut out by the small print

2017

54%

1992

2%

Mandator y arbitration

United States, use in non-unionised 
pr ivate-sector workplaces

Millions of American employees have no recourse to the courts
IN 2016 Misty Ashworth sued
her employer, Five Guys, a
fast-food chain, for sexual ha-
rassment and constructive dis-
missal. But the judge ruled that
her case could not be heard in
court. When she started the job,
she had agreed to take any dis-
putes with her employer to private arbitration. 
Ms Ashworth is not alone. Across private-sector work-
places in America, non-unionised employees are bound by
mandatory-arbitration agreements. In the early 1990s such
agreements covered only 2% of non-unionised workplaces; to-
day they cover more than half. 
The growing use of arbitration is partly an indictment of
America’s courts. Rarely is it in either side’s interests to litigate
for years and at great expense. Arbitration, by contrast, is quick
and ﬂexible. It lets both sides choose procedural hoops they
would forgo in return for a speedy resolution. A neutral third
party then hears the evidence and makes a decision. 
Arbitration works well when power is balanced between
the two sides: in commercial disputes between big ﬁrms, say.
But the balance between an employer and an employee, par-
ticularly in low-wage occupations, is often anything but even
(see page 57). And whereas the judicial system is designed, at
least in theory, to treat people equally before the law, manda-
tory arbitration puts employees at a further disadvantage.
Arbitration clauses are often hidden in the contractual
small print. Simply acknowledging the receipt of a staﬀ hand-
book can count as a binding agreement to the terms it sets out.
Even if workers do read everything, almost nobody starts a
new job expecting to have to seek redress against their employ-
er. When a dispute goes in front of arbitrators, their decisions
are not subject to a review and, except in rare cases, cannot be
appealed against. No public records of arbitration are kept.
Even if a worker wins the case, conﬁdentiality provisions can
shield repeat oﬀenders from exposure—as the ongoing wave of
workplace-harassment revelations has shown. 
This lack of scrutiny matters, because the incentives of
those who adjudicate disputes are skewed in favour of em-
ployers. Arbitrators are extremely unlikely to come across the
same employee in future cases, whereas repeat business with
the employer is likely. Such a set-up could strain the neutrality
of even the most upstanding arbitrator. Some large arbitration

ﬁrms do have a code of conduct, but less scrupulous ﬁrms are
not policed at all. Studies suggest that repeat business is corre-
lated with outcomes that favour the employer. 
The scales appear to be tilting even further towards bosses.
Mandatory-arbitration clauses are increasingly paired with
bans on class-action suits by groups of employees. That raises
the bar for workers to pursue complaints, by ensuring that
each must establish—and ﬁnance—his or her case separately; it
also lowers the risk that misconduct will damage an employ-
er’s ﬁnances or reputation. The Supreme Court is deliberating
whether that violates labour rights. If past form is a guide, the
court will rule that it does not: judges have consistently treated
mandatory arbitration as just another contract. 

How to increase the font size
Given that, and the failure of past attempts by Congress to im-
pose bans, mandatory arbitration seems likely to stay. And in-
deed, it does have a part to play. Employers should be broadly
free to contract privately with their workers. A default, low-
cost forum for resolving disputes is a good idea—as long as it is
designed to achieve fair outcomes. Fortunately, decent em-
ployers, ethical arbitrators and sensible regulation can deal
with many of the problems that bedevil arbitration.
For a start, ﬁrms should aim to set up a fair process, by seek-
ing informed consent, rather than smuggling arbitration
clauses into unrelated documentation. A narrower interpreta-
tion from the courts on what constitutes consent would help,
as would an opt-out period for employees. The clauses should
allow workers to join together and to act collectively. 
Arbitrators should be required to disclose conﬂicts of inter-
est, including whether they have repeat work from the em-
ployer. Options to avoid implicit bias might include manda-
tory rotation of arbitration ﬁrms or a system of randomised
selection. A requirement for arbitrators to oﬀer a written justi-
ﬁcation of their decision would encourage rigorous thinking.
If arbitrators get the law wrong, employees should be able to
seek judicial review.
Tougher disclosure requirements ought to apply to judg-
ments reached against the ﬁrm. Employers would be less toler-
ant of bad behaviour if they were required to disclose to inves-
tors how many settlements they reached and if they continued
to employ repeat oﬀenders. Make such changes, and both em-
ployees and employers could beneﬁt from arbitration without
anyone sacriﬁcing their right to a fair hearing. 7

The Economist Januar y 27th 2018 

Land reform in South Afr ica

Don’t do as Robert Mugabe did

Leaders 11

To help the poor, try privatisation and property rights
OF THE many grievances
from South Africa’s dec-
ades of white rule, the theft of
land still smarts more than
most. The “Natives Land Act” of
1913 set aside 90% of the country
for whites, who made up less
than a third of its people. Over
the next eight decades a succession of white governments
evicted 3.5m black South Africans from their homes, in cities
and in the countryside, prodding them onto the backs of lor-
ries at gunpoint and dumping them in barren reservations
misleadingly called “homelands”. “Even criminals dropping
straight from the gallows have an undisputed claim to six feet
of ground,” mourned Sol Plaatje, one of the founders of the Af-
rican National Congress (ANC), in 1916.
When apartheid ended in 1994 the courts returned land to
individuals who could show that they had been wrongfully
deprived of it (a minority, given poor records and the passage
of time). And the ANC, now in government, promised to buy
30% of the country’s farmland at market rates to distribute to
blacks by 1999 (see page 40). It has met only a third of this target
and has extended the deadline for another ten years. Corrup-
tion, red tape and incompetence have hobbled land reform.
Even without these problems, ﬁnding enough money to satis-
fy the ANC’s ambition would be hard. The budget deﬁcit is 4%
of GDP and public debt has ballooned to over 50%.
Inevitably, the slow pace of redistribution is leading to calls
for South Africa to take a short cut, by copying Robert Mugabe,
the deposed ruler of Zimbabwe, who conﬁscated land from
white farmers without paying. Julius Malema, South Africa’s
foremost populist ﬁrebrand, has urged his followers to take
whatever land they fancy, because “it belongs to you.” Jacob
Zuma, South Africa’s president, wants to change the constitu-

Morgan Stanley v Goldman Sachs

Sorpasso on the Street

tion to let the state seize land without paying for it. At a confer-
ence in December the ANC voted to make this party policy.
It is a terrible idea. A central plank of the negotiated deal
that ended apartheid peacefully was that property rights
should be respected. If the government rips up title deeds, no
sane investor will put money into South Africa and the econ-
omy will nosedive, as Zimbabwe tragically shows. 
South Africa’s government should certainly try to improve
the lot of the poor, both because it is the right thing to do and to
prevent the likes of Mr Malema from winning elections. But
policy must ﬁt South Africa as it is today. Two-thirds of South
Africans now live in cities, and they are not going back to the
countryside. They want jobs, schools and cleaner govern-
ment, not ﬁelds to grow maize in. More than 70% list unem-
ployment as their biggest worry. Only 2% say farming is. This is
hardly surprising, as farming is about 2% of the economy.

The future is urban
Land reform is still a good idea, but it must be well-designed,
cost-eﬀective and part of a broader strategy to promote eco-
nomic growth. First, the government should look in its own
backyard. The state directly owns about 10% of South Africa’s
land. Some tracts, urban and rural, have squatters on them.
Long-standing squatters should be given the land they live on.
Much of the rest should be sold, and the money used to plug
the deﬁcit or improve social services. Another 15% of South Af-
rica is “communal” land, most of which is owned by the state
and which was reserved for black people under apartheid.
Those who farm this land should be given title to it. This would
give them an asset against which they could borrow, and the
security of ownership that would encourage them to invest.
Or they could sell up and move to Johannesburg. South Africa
has plenty of land, but its future prosperity will be generated
by clustering in cities, not scratching out a living on the farm. 7

$bn

Goldman Sachs 

Market capitalisation

The battle of the investment banks is a parable of post-crisis ﬁnance 
FOR more than a decade, equ-
ity investors have reckoned
that Goldman Sachs was worth
more than its Wall Street rival,
Morgan Stanley. But on January
17th their opinion was turned on
its head. According to Bloom-
berg, the last time Morgan Stan-
ley led Goldman was back in 2006. Back then, a heedless in-
dustry-wide race to win market share and raise returns was
about to end in disaster. This time the industry is transformed,
and the two investment banks are on strikingly diﬀerent paths.
Morgan Stanley is being rewarded, above all, for its post-cri-

2006 08 10 12 14 16 18

sis decision to take control of Smith Barney, Citigroup’s
wealth-management business. In 2012 the bank’s core activity
of selling and trading securities accounted for almost two-
thirds of its net income, and wealth management for just over a
quarter. The ﬁgures now are 55% and 40% respectively. 
The mythology of Wall Street is built around big bets and
contrarian calls; the business of helping the aﬄuent manage
their money lacks panache. But in post-crisis ﬁnance, glamour
is out and stability is in. Wealth management oﬀers relatively
predictable returns and does not suck up too much capital.
Morgan Stanley this month raised its return-on-equity targets—
but only so far. On a conference call with analysts last week,
the ﬁrm’s bosses said that, if they achieved a return on equity

Morgan Stanley 

120

80

40

0

1

12 Leaders

The Economist Januar y 27th 2018

2 of more than 20%, commonplace during the go-go years, they
would be doing something wrong (see page 59).
Goldman has changed much less since the crisis. James
Gorman, Morgan Stanley’s chief executive, made his way in
wealth management; by contrast, Goldman’s boss, Lloyd
Blankfein, cut his teeth as a trader, and it shows. Goldman’s
business is lumpier and more volatile. It is more dependent
than Morgan Stanley on its ﬁxed-income, currencies and com-
modities (FICC) franchise. For a ﬁrm that sells itself on reading
markets better than anyone else, that bet has hurt its reputa-
tion as well as its bottom line. Revenue from FICC in the fourth
quarter of 2017 fell more precipitously, year on year, at Gold-
man than at its peers; for last year as a whole, revenue was not
much more than a ﬁfth of what it was in 2009. 
The ﬁxed-income business could yet revive, especially if in-
terest rates rise and markets become more volatile (see Button-
wood). Regulators in America are planning to streamline the
Volcker rule, a post-crisis ban on banks using their own money
to trade. But the chances of the trading ﬂoors recovering past
glories are vanishingly thin. Because regulators will go only so

far to loosen the shackles, the capital-intensity of businesses
like FICC will still weigh on returns. And as bond markets grad-
ually become electronic, banks’ margins will shrink, just as
they have in equity markets. Goldman itself openly acknowl-
edges the need to change. 

The boring companies
All of which makes Morgan Stanley’s overtaking manoeuvre a
parable for the industry. Lesson one is that, despite what bank-
ers like to argue, it is possible to make a reasonable return in a
more regulated environment. Lesson two is that dullness can
be a selling-point. Investment banks used to promise share-
holders outsize returns as the trade-oﬀ for their peculiar mix-
ture of volatility and opacity; that bargain looks much less ap-
petising today. Lesson three is that power on Wall Street has
tilted away from traders and high-octane clients like hedge
funds towards a more prosaic cast of characters: brokers, pas-
sive asset managers, corporate treasurers and well-oﬀ individ-
uals. Investment banks can still make decent returns. But not if
they play by the same old rules. 7

Trade tar iﬀs

Duties call

The Trump administration’s trade restrictions are more damaging than they appear
ON TRADE, President Do-
nald Trump has launched
lots of
investigations, with-
drawn from one deal (see Ban-
yan) and started the renegotia-
tion of another. But this week is
the ﬁrst time he has put up a big
new barrier. On January 22nd
he approved broad and punitive duties, of up to 30% on im-
ports of solar panels and up to 50% on imports of washing ma-
chines. His backers say that the measure, which aﬀects around
$10bn of imports, will protect American workers. His critics
cling to the hope that the damage will be mild. Both are wrong.
Start with the claims made by the administration. Workers
are also consumers, and Mr Trump’s actions will whack them.
Tariﬀs raise prices and dull competition. Whirlpool Corpora-
tion, the washing-machine maker which asked for the duties,
knows as much. When, in 2006, it merged with Maytag, a rival,
it quelled concerns about its high market share by pointing to
competition from abroad. One study found that clothes-dryer
prices rose by 14% after the merger. For washing machines,
where import competition was ﬁercer, prices were unchanged.
Even if American wallets are pinched, surely American
jobs are safer? Whirlpool is creating 200 new posts. Samsung
and LG, two South Korean washing-machine makers, are
ramping up their American production. But their deals were
hatched before Mr Trump came into oﬃce, spurred in part by
the logic of making heavy machines close to customers. 
The solar industry is a clearer case. It has about 260,000
workers, a mere 2,000 of whom were making solar cells and
panels at the end of 2016. The government reckons that the fast-
est-growing occupation over the next ten years will be that of
solar installer. The Solar Energy Industries Association, a body
that is enraged by the new tariﬀs, reckons that the industry will

support up to 23,000 fewer jobs because of them. Meanwhile,
as if to underline the irony, the two companies that asked for
protection are unlikely to be saved.
And do not forget that the tariﬀs may harm American in-
dustry more broadly. Restricting markets for imports tends to
spark retaliation that restricts markets for exports—especially
when, as with these latest tariﬀs, they aﬀect everyone. China,
supposedly the focus of American ire, produces 60% of the
world’s solar cells and is responsible for 21% of America’s im-
ports. But South Korea will also be hit, and its government is
poised to dispute America’s action at the World Trade Organi-
sation. Other casualties include Mexico, Canada and the Euro-
pean Union. 

President, not precedent
Critics of this week’s tariﬀs draw solace from the fact that Mr
Trump’s actions were broadly in line with the steer from the
United States International Trade Commission, a quasi-judi-
cial review body, and in both cases were weaker than the peti-
tioners had originally requested. They point out, too, that occu-
pants of the Oval Oﬃce have resorted to global “safeguard”
tariﬀs on 19 previous occasions. 
That Mr Trump has stayed within the rules is small comfort:
they give him enormous scope to poison world trade. And it
would be wrong to skate over the diﬀerences between his ad-
ministration and its predecessors. The last time this particular
safeguard was applied was in 2002. It is especially belligerent.
Past presidents remained wary of hurting American consum-
ers, and mindful of international repercussions. Mr Trump, by
contrast, seems to hold a steadfast belief that protectionism
works. His rhetoric—and now his actions—invite aggrieved pe-
titioners to apply for help. The logic of his stance on trade is to
use tariﬀs not sparingly, but repeatedly and aggressively. Mr
Trump is now open for business, just not the healthy sort. 7

Evolved over billions
of years...
Protecting your enterprise
in one hour.

The immune system has evolved over billions of 
years. But it takes just one hour to install one in 
your enterprise. 

Using artiﬁ cial intelligence, Darktrace can tell friend 
from foe, and catches threats that others miss. 
Even if they’ve never been seen before.

From quiet insider threats and zero-day attacks, to 
hacks of connected devices or industrial networks, 
our software sees it and responds. 

 
 
 
14

Letters

Unhappy anniversary

I fundamentally disagree with
the conclusion of your leader
reviewing Donald Trump’s
ﬁrst year in oﬃce. You let him
oﬀ too lightly (“One year old”,
January 13th). The critical point
comes in the ﬁnal line of your
argument: “He and his admin-
istration need to be held prop-
erly to account for what they
actually do.” Yet you reject
what you describe as an
“obsession” of Mr Trump’s
opponents with his character,
and suggest that his lack of
principles actually creates an
opportunity for making deals.
In a country still torn by
racial divisions, Mr Trump’s
comments after Charlottesville
matter a great deal. In a coun-
try whose constitution en-
shrines free speech, labelling
the press as “the enemy of the
people” matters a great deal.
Blatant disregard for the truth
matters a great deal, as does
encouraging violence by the
police. The list goes on and is
as long as your arm. 
You are wrong to imply that
calling attention to this type of
behaviour is frivolous. Democ-
racy and its institutions are
fragile and precious. The
presidency matters more,
domestically and overseas,
than the simple tally of
legislative achievements. All
democratically elected leaders
should be held to account for
their character, their honesty
and their eﬀect on the fabric of
their nations. As the leader of
the free world, America’s
president should be held to the
highest standards of all.
In some ways, your argu-
ments demonstrate the extent
to which our society has been
anaesthetised by Mr Trump
and his kind. Many of those
who hold him to account for
his ethics and his words do so
not “as an exercise in wish
fulﬁlment” to remove him
from oﬃce but because they
have a grasp of the magnitude
of the issues facing the United
States, a love of their country
and a belief that integrity,
morality and character are
important. The president’s
weak character and dishones-
ty contribute greatly to the
erosion of trust in democratic

institutions, an ever-increasing
partisanship, greater social
divisions and the consequen-
tial breakdown in the ability of
society to ﬁnd solutions to
pressing problems.

JONATHAN TURNER

San Francisco

Shame on you. Your blinding
desire to highlight the liberal
left makes you write articles,
such as your piece on Mr
Trump’s ﬁrst year, that are
incorrect and totally inaccu-
rate. Liberals (Democrats) need
to learn how to lose. You’ll be
back in power one day and
you’ll have your chance once
more. For the time being, let Mr
Trump do his job. His potential
mistakes may give you abun-
dant ammunition to demon-
strate that he is wrong, but let
the guy prove you right. Be
good losers and remember
that the country comes before
any political ideology. 

ANDY VAN WALLEGHEM

Cypress, Texas

Marginalised communities

It was very welcome to see a
thoughtful article on the dire
situation of Gypsies and
Travellers in Britain who ﬁnd
themselves newly ineligible to
apply for an authorised
encampment (“No place to
roam”, January 13th). The most
unjust eﬀect, however, is on
the most vulnerable—those
who cannot travel for reasons
of ill-health or extreme old
age—and who now cannot rely
on any national planning
advice of the sort which used
to enable them to continue to
live within the Gypsy and
Traveller ethnic way of life. 
I should add that ethnicity
has been legally established, in
the case of Romani Gypsies
(Commission for Racial Equali-
ty v Dutton, 1989) and Irish
Travellers (O’Leary v Allied
Domecq, 2000), which is why
they should be spelt with
capitals G and T. You wouldn’t
want to write “jews” or
“sikhs”, would you?

JANET WHITAKER

Co-chair
All-Par ty Parliamentar y Group
for Gypsies, Travellers and Roma
House of Lords
London

Singaporean values

“Rules are thicker than blood”
( January 13th) derided Singa-
pore’s norms on what consti-
tutes a family as “Victorian”.
Our values and social norms
on what makes for a stable
family unit are conservative
and shape the government’s
policies and rules on adoption.
They diﬀer from today’s West-
ern norms, which are histori-
cally recent and by no means
uncontested, even in Western
societies. Singaporeans will
determine their own pace of
any change in family values. 
A push for rapid social
change, especially on conten-
tious moral issues, risks polar-
ising society and producing
unintended results. In Singa-
pore nearly all children are
born and raised in wedlock,
starkly diﬀerent from what
now happens in the West. We
make no claim to know which
values are best for every
society. The Economist may
think Singapore is quaint and
old-fashioned, but time will
tell if a cautious approach to
social change is wiser.

FOO CHI HSIA

High commissioner for 
Singapore
London

Terminal decline

The main issue that prevents
America’s airports from pro-
viding the best possible pas-
senger experience is a woeful-
ly understaﬀed Customs and
Border Protection agency
(“Departure gates of hell”,
January 6th). To ensure greater
eﬃciency and security, air-
ports, including Miami Inter-
national, have called for in-
creases in CBP front-line staﬀ,
for which Congress needs to
provide the funding. CBP has
for years faced a shortage of
thousands of oﬃcers across all
our air, land and sea ports. This
is a problem that will only get
worse when enhanced border-
security measures further
delay the traﬃc transiting
through these ports. 

KEVIN BURKE

President and CEO
Airpor ts Council International,
Nor th Amer ica
Washington, DC

The Economist Januar y 27th 2018

Say what you like about Wash-
ington Dulles, JFK and Miami,
but you left out one American
airport that has managed to
earn the wrath of both Donald
Trump and Joe Biden: LaGuar-
dia. Both men have said travel-
ling through LaGuardia is like
being in the “third world”. 

MIKE GALLAGHER

Doha, Qatar

No list of the world’s worst
airports is complete without a
special mention for certain
terminals at Paris Charles de
Gaulle. In these Houses of
Dread, the ratio of border
oﬃcials to passengers is some-
times one to a thousand. Pick-
pockets and hustlers zero in on
you under the sight of un-
concerned policemen. Taxi
drivers insult you copiously if
you want to pay by card. The
airport’s Wi-Fi gives you an
advance taste of escargots.

ROMAIN POIROT-LELLIG

Par is

I nominate Atlanta. It has the
longest queues and most
bolshie oﬃcials, even by
American standards. When
my feisty French wife
expressed concern at missing
our transit ﬂight, the gentle-
man replied, “Lady, at this
point your only concern is: am
I going to allow you into my
country or not?” My British
passport full of visas to Russia,
Qatar and so on, required an
explanation for each stamp.
Yes we missed our ﬂight. And
they lost our luggage. 

DAVID LING

Eguisheim, France 7

Letters are welcome and should be
addressed to the Editor at 
The Economist, The Adelphi Building,
1-11 John Adam Street, 

London WC2N 6HT

E-mail: letters@economist.com
More letters are available at:

Economist.com/letters

Executive Focus

15

The Economist Januar y 27th 2018

16

Executive Focus

The Economist Januar y 27th 2018

Br ieﬁng Amer ica and Nor th Korea

The Economist Januar y 27th 2018 17

Face oﬀ

W A S H I N G T O N , D C

Hope that Donald Trump is bluﬃng over North Korea, but do not count on it
THE last
time that America almost
peared to be a hydrogen bomb, and pro-
risked a pre-emptive strike on North
duced enough plutonium and uranium for
Korea the gamble oﬀered a spectacular
possibly dozens more warheads. Its mis-
pay-oﬀ. Ashton Carter, a leading architect
siles credibly threaten American territory
of that plan, recalls that his scheme for
in Guam, Hawaii or even the continental
bombing the Yongbyon nuclear facility in
United States, even if oﬃcials do not be-
1994 assumed that in one or two days the
lieve a North Korean nuclear-tipped rocket
entirety of the regime’s nuclear pro-
can yet reach an American city.
gramme could be levelled and entombed
Just because war in Korea would be un-
in rubble. Mr Carter, who went on to be-
speakably dangerous does not mean that it
come defence secretary in the Obama ad-
will not happen. Sober oﬃcials with long
ministration, now thinks that an American
careers in Asia policy talk of being more
ﬁrst strike would only put “a signiﬁcant
fearful than at any time in recent memory.
dent” in North Korea’s arsenal of nuclear
America is governed by Donald Trump,
devices and bombmaking sites. “The dif-
who revels in matching North Korea in
ference today is that the North Koreans are
bluster. He has called Mr Kim “Little Rocket
very good at hiding, burying and moving
Man” and a “sick puppy”, and promised
around their nuclear infrastructure,” says
that continued North Korean threats to
Mr Carter, now at Harvard University. 
America “will be met with ﬁre and fury
If the potential upsides of a strike have
like the world has never seen”. Mr Trump
shrunk, the risks have grown hugely. The
has at times called diplomacy with the
crisis of 1994 saw Kim Il Sung thwart inter-
Kim regime “a waste of time”. He is also
national inspections and threaten to put
scornful of allies and alliances, causing
plutonium from Yongbyon into half a doz-
one Japanese expert to identify a grave
en primitive bombs. Since then power
concern: “that Trump will come up with a
passed to the despot’s son and in 2011 to his
military option and not take the costs seri-
grandson, Kim Jong Un, a young man in a
ously.” It is not just Mr Trump. The generals
hurry who has to date never met a foreign
seen as a steadying inﬂuence on the presi-
leader, even from China, the closest his all-
dent have given warnings that the Kim re-
but-friendless kingdom has to an ally.
gime cannot be permitted to build weap-
North Korea has tested six nuclear devices
ons that threaten American territory.
between 2006 and 2017, including what ap-
General Joseph Dunford, chairman of

the joint chiefs of staﬀ and a man who
wields his inﬂuence discreetly, last year
chided anyone who thinks it unimagin-
able that America might use force to check
a North Korean nuclear menace. “What’s
unimaginable to me is allowing a capabili-
ty that would allow a nuclear weapon to
land in Denver, Colorado,” he said. In Au-
gust 2017 H.R. McMaster, a lieutenant-gen-
eral who is national security adviser to Mr
Trump, scolded an Obama-era predeces-
sor, Susan Rice, for suggesting that their
country could contain and deter a nuclear-
armed North Korea, as it did the Soviet Un-
ion. “She’s not right,” chided Mr McMaster,
asking how “classical deterrence theory”
could apply to so brutal a regime.

On manoeuvres
Even the defence secretary, James Mattis, a
cerebral former Marine general who says
his job is to “buy time for our diplomats” to
solve the North Korean crisis, has weighed
in. Put on the spot by reporters in Septem-
ber 2017, he insisted that there are military
options that would not imperil Seoul, the
South Korean capital, though its 10m in-
habitants live within range of the North’s
artillery and missiles. Such options exist,
he said, “but I will not go into details.”
Others sound less certain. Mr Carter
notes—with tact—that retaliating against a
foreign attack is the standing policy of the
North Korean armed forces. “If the US and
South Korea decided to initiate a strike, we
would have to make sure that we were
thoroughly prepared for a full-on conﬂict,”
he says. Invited to contemplate military
options that would not put Seoul in harm’s
way Abraham Denmark, a Pentagon oﬃ-
cial during the Obama era who worked on 

1

18 Br ieﬁng Amer ica and Nor th Korea

2 Korea policy, answers simply: “I can’t imag-
ine what those could be.”
Discussions of Korea strategy quickly
drift into seemingly impossible tangles, in-
volving deadly Stalinist court politics and
fantastical perils. Oﬃcial reports detail the
North’s nuclear, biological and chemical
arsenals, and artillery pieces in hardened
bunkers just north of the demilitarised
zone (DMZ) that divides the two Koreas,
which some analysts estimate can ﬁre
10,000 rounds a minute at Seoul. A Penta-
gon report of 2015 talks of North Korean
drones, midget-submarines and of com-
mandos who may attack targets in South
Korea “via suspected underground, cross-
DMZ tunnels”. Mr Mattis has said a Korean
conﬂict “would probably be the worst kind
of ﬁghting in most people’s lifetimes”.
Still, responding to presidential de-
mands for more and better options, oﬃ-
cials are debating possible “preventive”
strikes, a term denoting actions taken earli-
er than “pre-emptive” attacks in response
to an imminent threat, like a missile being
readied for launch.

Untangled logic
At root, however, debates about Korea
strategy turn on two starkly straightfor-
ward questions, spelled out in interviews
with serving and former defence and na-
tional-security oﬃcials, diplomats and
spies, including several with personal ex-
perience of negotiating with North Korea.
First, will China ever break decisively with
North Korea, its infuriating neighbour but
valued buﬀer against the world? Second,
can Mr Kim be deterred? For if he cannot,
then any responsible American president
must contemplate a strike, risking what the
Japanese expert summarises as “tens of
thousands of casualties today to prevent
millions tomorrow”.
Aides to Mr Trump boast that the presi-
dent’s resolve explains China’s support for
UN Security Council sanctions of unprece-
dented severity, including curbs on North
Korean exports of coal and textiles and on
ﬂows of oil and reﬁned petroleum from
China. A senior State Department oﬃcial
recalls Mr Trump’s order to strike Syria
with Tomahawk cruise missiles in April
2017, during dinner with the Chinese presi-
dent, Xi Jinping, at Mar-a-Lago, his Florida
estate. That strike, enforcing a red line over
Syria’s use of chemical weapons, “put mil-
itary action back into our diplomacy”, says
the oﬃcial. “It was an important data point
that China internalised.”
In fact China has yet to abandon a long-
standing hierarchy of Korean horror in
which a nuclear-armed North ranks sec-
ond. For China, it is pipped by the prospect
of a chaotic fall of the Kim regime, fol-
lowed by a reuniﬁcation of the two Koreas
on Western terms, lining China’s border
with American allies and high-powered
American radars (or worse, hulking GIs in

Oakley sunglasses). 
Team Trump has tried sweet reason.
Rex Tillerson, the secretary of state, joined
Mr Mattis in assuring China publicly that
as it pursues the denuclearisation of the
Korean peninsula, America has no interest
in regime change or accelerated reuniﬁca-
tion, seeks no excuse to garrison troops
north of the DMZ and has no desire to
harm the “long-suﬀering North Korean
people”, as distinct from their rulers.
Revealing a once closely held secret, Mr
Tillerson told the Atlantic Council, a Wash-
ington think-tank, last December about
“conversations” with China about how
the two countries might secure loose nuc-
lear weapons should North Korea fall into
chaos. This included assurances that
American forces would retreat south of the
DMZ when conditions allowed. Less
sweetly, the senior oﬃcial at the State De-
partment says that when Mr Tillerson ﬁrst
met his Chinese counterparts, Yang Jiechi
and Wang Yi, in March 2017, he told them
that “we are out of time” and to drop their
long-standing view of North Korea as an
asset that keeps America usefully tied up.
Mr Tillerson told China that it can help
America do more “the easy way or the
hard way”, with the hard way meaning
secondary sanctions on Chinese entities
that trade with North Korea, and credible
threats that Mr Trump is “serious about the
military option if we cannot resolve this
diplomatically”. Addressing that hierarchy
of horror, the aim is to convince Chinese
leaders that the very thing they fear most—
instability next door, followed by an Asian
nuclear-arms race—will be brought about
by continued toleration of America’s

The Economist Januar y 27th 2018

worst fear, namely North Korean nukes.
Put that way, the Korean dilemma argu-
ably revolves around a single question: is
Mr Trump bluﬃng? Should North Korea,
China and the wider world believe that
America will use force to prevent Mr Kim
from building a nuclear missile that can
strike Washington, DC, or Los Angeles?
Team Trump is at pains to explain why
the boss is not bluﬃng, and why 2018 is, in
the words of one senior administration of-
ﬁcial, “a very dangerous year”. That oﬃcial
pointedly praises Israel for twice launch-
ing air strikes against suspected nuclear
weapons sites, once in 1981 against the Osi-
rak reactor being built by Iraq, and in 2007
against a reactor in Syria allegedly under
construction with North Korean help.

Strike one, strike two…
The oﬃcial calls those strikes “textbook
cases” of preventive action. He draws at-
tention to a Trump tweet in late December,
linking to a television interview that Mr
Trump gave as a private businessman in
1999, urging America to “negotiate like cra-
zy” with North Korea but, if talks failed, to
“do something now” before warheads are
aimed at New York and other cities.
Strikingly, though, when asked point
blank whether Mr Trump has already set
red lines that North Korea may not cross,
oﬃcials will only reply that as a general
rule, they are very careful about drawing
red lines. Though news outlets have re-
ported debates about giving North Korea a
“bloody nose”, an oﬃcial calls that phrase
“a ﬁction of the press”.
Insiders deny that the Trump adminis-
tration is dividing into camps of hawks and

1

North Korea’s nuclear path

Missile tests

Threatens to
leave Nuclear
Non-Proliferation
Treaty (NPT),
then relents

First test of
Nodong 1 missile

UN inspectors say
Nor th Korea is
hiding evidence of
nuclear fuel for
bombmaking

Signs “agreed
framework” with
US to freeze and
dismantle
nuclear
programme in
exchange for
nuclear reactors,
aid and easing of
sanctions

Fires
Taepodong
missile over
Japan

Withdraws from NPT

Declares
reactivation of
nuclear facilities

Announces
it has nuclear
weapons

Agrees to
freeze
testing
on long-
range
missiles

Expels UN
inspectors from
Yongbyon
nuclear
facility

Launches
Unha-2
rocket in
def iance
of UN
secur ity
resolution

Expels UN
inspectors;
pulls out of
talks and
restar ts
nuclear
facilities

2nd nuclear
test

Says it will disable
nuclear facilities.
US agrees to
unfreeze assets
and provide aid

Carr ies out 1st
underground
nuclear test

Agrees to
return to
NPT. One
day later,
demands
reactor
from US

3rd nuclear
test

Restar ts
Yongbyon
nuclear reactor

6th nuclear
test

Fur ther UN
sanctions

Fires two missiles
over Japan

4th and 5th
nuclear
tests

Launches
satellite on
Unha-3

UN agrees on
new sanctions

Agrees to
testing
morator ium
in exchange
for aid

Launches
a satellite
using
Unha-3
rocket

Sinks
South
Korean
warship
Cheonan

96

95

1993 94
NK supreme
leaders and
US presidents 
Kim Il
Sung
Kim Jong Il

97

98

99 2000 01

02

03

Ser ies of US-Nor th 
Korean talks

04
05
06
07
08
Six-par ty talks with China, 
Russia, US, Japan and 
South Korea

09

10

11

12

13
14
15
16
17
Sources: CSIS; The Economist

Bill Clinton

George W. Bush

Barack Obama

Kim Jong Un

Donald
Trump

The Economist Januar y 27th 2018

2 doves, with each taking a diﬀerent view of
the utility of talks. A clearer divide turns on
relative optimism or pessimism about Mr
Kim’s intentions, with Mr McMaster a
leading voice of doom (he has compared
this moment of geopolitical peril to 1914).
In particular, pessimists doubt North Ko-
rea’s claim that it wants nuclear weapons
that can hit America for self-defence.

Undeterred?
Logic, and Mr Kim’s own words, point to a
nuclear programme with grander ambi-
tions, perhaps to “drive the US from the
peninsula” or reunify Korea under the
North’s ﬂag, argues the senior administra-
tion oﬃcial. “Why should a regime starve a
couple of million of its own people to
death, expose itself to punishing sanctions,
[and] allow itself to be isolated by all its
friends, merely to gain a deterrent that they
already had for 60 years, from artillery
pieces pointed at Seoul?”
Several oﬃcials and ex-oﬃcials who
see the value of frightening Mr Kim to the
negotiating table hope privately that Mr
Trump is bluﬃng, believing that a limited
strike would risk massive retaliation. Even
narrowly-focused operations North of the
border are deemed risky. In late 2016 Mr
Obama’s National Security Council organ-
ised a war game, asking military, dip-
lomatic and intelligence oﬃcials to simu-
late a mission to secure nuclear weapons
in a North Korea tumbling into instability.
Participants call the exercise deeply so-
bering, with so many American troops
needed to secure the large number of nuc-
lear sites that it could take months to build
them up, losing any element of surprise,
and raising seemingly insuperable ques-
tions about when to evacuate Americans
from the region without triggering chaos.
An unclassiﬁed letter sent by the Pentagon
to Congress in November 2017 oﬀered the
assessment that only a ground invasion
could ﬁnd and secure all weapons sites.
A senior American oﬃcial recalls being
asked by foreign counterparts why Mr Kim
could not simply be killed. In reply he
would point to the outside world’s danger-
ous lack of knowledge about what orders
the leader’s death might trigger: “We seri-
ously don’t know that there isn’t some sort
of automatic doomsday process that pulls
down the pillars of the temple.” The same
oﬃcial asked military colleagues
for
“horse’s head on the pillow” options that
would terrify Mr Kim without triggering a
full-scale response. “Nobody I spoke to in
the military had an idea that could reliably
thread the needle,” he says.
Scenarios for limited strikes could in-
clude the shooting down of a North Kore-
an ballistic missile test. But a failure would
damage the credibility of American de-
fences. There is also a dangerous paradox
attached to any action launched on the
grounds that North Korea is deemed deaf

to reason, notes Joseph DeTrani, a former
intelligence oﬃcer and commentator for
“The Cipher Brief”, a national-security
website, who is also a semi-oﬃcial envoy
entrusted with meeting senior North Kore-
an diplomats.
If trust vanishes, North Koreans “may
see an imminent threat coming to them
that is not an imminent threat”, disbeliev-
ing assurances that a strike is limited. In his
experience, the country’s diplomats are
professional and informed about
the
world. But that only helps if their advice
reaches core leaders, who also hear from
“hardliners in North Korea [whom] we do
not know,” cautions Mr DeTrani. He dis-
agrees with colleagues (and there are
many) who call Mr Trump’s tweets un-
helpful. On balance it is positive for North
Koreans to hear directly from the president,

he says. They understand bombast.
Optimists note that America has real
points of leverage, even without force. Mr
Carter urges step-by-step “coercive diplo-
macy”, setting out speciﬁc sticks and car-
rots for discrete North Korean actions, from
missile tests to underground nuclear tests.
If China proves incapable of playing a pos-
itive role, he recommends it is “sidelined”.
Several oﬃcials say that China’s will-
ingness to toughen sanctions is mostly
about managing America, which is seen as
one of two irresponsible powers, along-
side North Korea, distracting Chinese lead-
ers from their domestic priorities. “The
Chinese are more upset with the North Ko-
reans for waking the American giant,” says
an American oﬃcial.
China is now enforcing UN trade em-
bargoes on North Korea more strictly, in
part to ward oﬀ American sanctions target-
ing speciﬁc Chinese banks and oil traders,
though diplomats still deplore Chinese
“salami-slicing” of each new sanctions
plan. By a process of elimination, China
now backs “pressure that will placate the
Americans without being strong enough
to [make the Kim regime] collapse,” says

Br ieﬁng Amer ica and Nor th Korea 19

the oﬃcial. Meanwhile, China continues
to argue for America to freeze military exer-
cises and curb deployments of advanced
weapons in Asia. China is always “willing
to bargain away the American military
footprint”, growls a second oﬃcial.
A ﬁnal camp combines scepticism
about North Korea’s motives—dismissing
Mr Kim’s claims to need nuclear weapons
as a deterrent—with (relative) optimism
about sanctions. A Western diplomat says
that North Korea believes that, if it can be-
come the only nation with a long-range nu-
clear capability other than America, Brit-
ain, China, France and Russia, it will be
welcomed to an “elite club”, free of all
sanctions, “which is pie in the sky”.
This camp would use North Korea’s
ambitions against it. Daniel Russel, former
assistant secretary of state for East Asian
and Paciﬁc aﬀairs during the Obama era,
shares the pessimists’ belief that North Ko-
rea does not need nuclear weapons for de-
terrence, securing its safety with its ability
to bombard Seoul. Nor does it need mis-
siles—it can already detonate a nuclear de-
vice smuggled into South Korea, even if
that would be suicidal.
Mr Russel argues that the North’s goal is
money and other concessions. If through
sustained sanctions “North Korea is de-
nied the pay-oﬀ, the ransom it is seeking, it
hasn’t actually achieved the [right] return
on 
investment on 
the nuclear pro-
gramme,” says Mr Russel, now at the Asia
Society. A sense of being squeezed without
reward is spreading discontent among the
elites, he says. “The ability to limit Kim’s
ability to govern, via sanctions, is the best
leverage we have.”
Ironically, given all the focus in Wash-
ington on Mr Trump’s impulsive ways, in-
siders worry most about a crisis that is
thrust upon him. They fear that China and
North Korea are both waiting Mr Trump
out, hoping that he loses the White House
or become distracted by other crises. 

Mutual incomprehension
Mr Denmark speaks for several oﬃcials
when expressing dread about Mr Kim mis-
judging some fresh provocation. In 2010
the North sank the Cheonan, a South Kore-
an patrol ship, killing 46 sailors. He fears
Mr Kim trying a similar act today, thinking
that America will not respond. The North
might overreact to American demonstra-
tions of will, such as bomber ﬂights oﬀ the
coast, says Mr Denmark. “What’s to stop
the North Koreans thinking that’s the be-
ginning of an attack? That keeps me up.
Who has launch authority on the North
Korean side in the middle of the night?”
On the other side stands Mr Trump, a
wild card who may soon face risks he
deems intolerable while lacking any good
options. “The president may be forced to
take action,” a US oﬃcial says. “The poten-
tial for conﬂict is very high.” 7

CURE ENERGY INEFFICIENCY

PUMP REPLACEMENT WILL HELP 
UZ BRUSSELS BECOME ONE OF BELGIUM’S 
MOST SUSTAINABLE HOSPITALS

Jimmy Van Moer
Energy Engineering Manager
University Hospital
Brussels, Belgium

By replacing old pumps with Grundfos energy-efficient solutions, 
University Hospital in Brussels saves an estimated 65,000 euro, 
643,000 kWh and 140 tonnes of CO2 a year. 

See full story at Grundfos.com/cases-sustainable 

Asia

The Economist Januar y 27th 2018 21

Also in this section
22 North Korea’s conglomerates
23 The plight of the Rohingya diaspora
24 Banyan: Asia, champion of free trade

Caste prejudice in India

Unconscionable

D e l h i

For daily analysis and debate on Asia, visit
Economist.com/asia

dia’s 1.3bn people.) 
The headlines reveal quotidian horrors.
Dalit Woman Raped and Murdered, Man
Poisons Well Used by Dalits, Dalits At-
tacked for Slaughtering Cow, Dalit Youth
Killed For Watching Upper-Caste Cere-
mony, Dalit Forced To Shave Moustache.
Protests and riots by members of higher
castes typically end with politicians and
oﬃcials acceding to their demands; similar
actions by Dalits tend to be met with re-
pression. Chandrashekhar Azad, a promi-
nent Dalit activist arrested in May, was or-
dered to be released by a high court in
November, with the judge reprimanding
police for their “politically motivated”
handling of his case. A day later he was re-
arrested under the draconian National Se-
curity Act, intended for terrorist cases, un-
der which he may spend a year in
detention without charge.
Many Dalits have broken professional
barriers, but many more are stuck doing 

1

Men aged 24-29 with 
secondar y education

% of total, years ending

Malnour ishment

2015-16, %

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

Others†

Dalits

1983 90 2000

12

Dalits

Adivasis
Higher castes

OBCs*
India

0

25

50

Children‡

Women§

Men§

*Other backward castes    †Excluding Muslims
‡Aged 6-59 months    §Aged 15-49 years, BMI below 18.5

75

50

25

0

Dalits are better oﬀ than they have ever been—but that’s not saying much
FOR Dalits, these are the best of times.
cated and less healthy than average (see
Once known as untouchables and re-
chart); they are 30% more likely than other
viled as ritually unclean, this sixth of In-
Indians to end up in prison. Out of the 642
dia’s population has never been more inte-
faculty members in the country’s top man-
grated. Since the constitution banned
agement schools, which are state-run, only
discrimination against untouchables 70
four are Dalits. Out of 496 vice-chancel-
years ago, and with quotas for state
lors—in eﬀect presidents—of state universi-
schools, jobs and elected oﬃces giving Da-
ties, just six are from “scheduled” castes, as
lits a leg up, gaps in education, income and
the lowest ranks of the Hindu caste hierar-
health have steadily shrunk.
chy are oﬃcially known. (“Scheduled
Dalits, who in the past feared crossing
tribes” or adivasis—tribal communities tra-
certain streets, now have their own mil-
ditionally excluded from the caste system
lionaire-ﬁlled chamber of
commerce,
altogether—constitute a further 9% of In-
scores of energetic NGOs to promote their
rights and some 84 of the 545 MPs in the
Lok Sabha, the lower house of parliament.
In October a board that manages hundreds
of Hindu temples in the southern state of
Kerala for the ﬁrst time broke one of the last
ancient taboos, inducting six Dalits to
serve as priests. Ram Nath Kovind, who
was elected India’s president in July, was
born into a weaver caste, making him the
second Dalit to serve as head of state.
But Indian presidents hold little real
power, and there has never been a Dalit
prime minister. That it is the best of times
for Dalits does not necessarily mean that
times are very good. Reservations, as the
government’s quotas are known, have in-
deed given once-unimagined opportunity
to many Dalits. “Without them we would
all be cleaning shit,” says one activist. Yet
Dalits remain markedly poorer, worse edu-

Sources: National Cr ime Records Bureau; National Family
Health Sur vey 4; India Human Development Sur vey; Mint

Number of hate cr imes 
against Dalits

All manner of abuse

People liv ing in 
poverty, %

Dalits

OBCs*
Higher
castes

2011

13

15 16

2005 2012

Adivasis

Murder

2.5

2.0

1.5

1.0

0.5

0

India

Rape

’000

22 Asia

2 jobs no one else will take, such as dispos-
ing of dead animals and cleaning sewers.
In 2017 alone some 90 sewer-cleaners, all
Dalits, were ﬁshed out dead from India’s
drains, an activist group reports. So much
are Dalits associated with tidying up other
peoples’ mess that anthropologists have
identiﬁed caste attitudes as the main rea-
son for rural India’s uniquely high rate of
open defecation. It was found that many
upper-caste villagers, including Dalits of
higher sub-caste than the drain-cleaners,
see toilets as “polluting” to their homes.
Dalit parents regularly protest that schools
have singled out their children to clean toi-
lets. They also complain that state schools
assign numbers to plates when handing
out free lunches, lest a child whose family
insists on ritual separation from Dalits be
served on “polluted” crockery.
In eastern and southern parts of India
the proportion of respondents who say
they consider Dalits polluting can be as
low as 1%. When asked more speciﬁc ques-
tions about interacting with Dalits, how-
ever, these numbers tend to rise, dramati-
cally so in less enlightened parts of India.
In the central state of Madhya Pradesh
some 53% of respondents to one survey
said their family tried to avoid certain
forms of contact with Dalits; surveys of ru-
ral areas in nearby states found rates of 65%
or more. Although 55% of Indians say they
do not mind people of diﬀerent castes mar-
rying one another, only 4% say they have
married someone from outside their caste.
A study in 2010 of some 1,589 villages in
the western state of Gujarat identiﬁed 98
practices, from preventing access to public
wells to obliging Dalits to play drums at
weddings, and ranked them in order of
prevalence. It found, for example, that in
91% of villages Dalits were not allowed in
non-Dalit temples, and in 98% of them
non-Dalits would not serve tea to Dalits in
their homes. The survey also found a high
prevalence of similar practices among dif-
ferent sub-castes of Dalits.
Yet such practices, although still wide-
spread, are declining. Recent surveys sug-
gest that barely a quarter of families still
follow them in some form, compared with
virtually all Hindus before independence.
Devesh Kapur, an economist at the Univer-
sity of Pennsylvania, recalls visiting a rural
area in the 1970s. “The kind of language
that was used and the whole emphasis on
purity and pollution was just nothing like
as relaxed as we see now.”
Mr Kapur suggests it is just as important
to consider the “intensity” of practice as
the prevalence. Even among families who
admit to prejudices such as refusing to let
Dalits into their homes, or to use the same
utensils, it is likely that the number of such
taboos has diminished over time. Acceler-
ating urbanisation, bringing with it a much
wider degree of anonymity, is an impor-
tant factor. “Take the fast-food industry,”

says Mr Kapur. “I don’t know who has
touched my food anymore, and pretty
soon I stop caring.”
Martin Macwan, a Dalit activist and
one of the authors of the Gujarat study,
cites another example of change. When he
started a service oﬀering free legal advice
20 years ago all his clients were Dalits. Oth-
ers did inquire, but at ﬁrst balked when Mr
Macwan told them they could have his ser-
vices free of charge if they would drink a
glass of water in a Dalit home. Now a third
of his clients are non-Dalit.
Indians will not turn liberal overnight,
says Mr Kapur. It happens in stages. The
ﬁrst is when people stop noticing who is
Dalit; the second when they stop caring.
The third is when they actively want to do
away with untouchability. “I think we are
now somewhere between the ﬁrst and sec-
ond steps,” he says. 7

North Korea’s conglomerates

From planes to
mackerel

S e o u l

A new breed of company is helping to
prop up the nuclear dictatorship
“A UNIQUE and sweet taste,” says a
poster describing a new brand of
soju, a local ﬁrewater, made by Naego-
hyang. The North Korean company started
out making cigarettes (reportedly puﬀed
on by Kim Jong Un, the country’s dictator).
It has branched out into a thicket of unre-
lated items, including playing cards, sani-
tary towels, sports kit and electronics. It ad-
vertises them in the stadium of the
women’s football team it sponsors.
Naegohyang, which means “My Home-
land”, is one of what appears to be a grow-
ing number of large and diversiﬁed busi-
nesses in North Korea. In Kwangbok Area

The Economist Januar y 27th 2018

Shopping Centre in Pyongyang, the capital,
Naegohyang’s “7.27” cigarettes compete
with “Hanggong” 
(meaning “airline”)
brand, produced by Air Koryo, the national
carrier. The latter, too, appears to be ex-
panding into several industries, from mak-
ing potted pheasant and canned mackerel
to operating taxis and petrol stations.
Such conglomerates are often com-
pared to the chaebol of South Korea, but are
best understood as “a private-public part-
nership” says Chris Green of International
Crisis Group, a think-tank. Under North
Korean law the government is the sole eco-
nomic operator and private business is
banned. Although these companies are
nominally owned by the state, they are run
mainly privately and rely, at least in part,
on private funding.
After a famine caused the state ration-
ing system to collapse in the 1990s, Kim
Jong Il, Mr Kim’s father and predecessor,
turned a blind eye to small markets called
jangmadang, where ordinary North Kore-
ans bought and sold goods. Ministries
were later given rights to trade in certain
goods, creating opportunities for entrepre-
neurs down the supply chain. The govern-
ment requires some state-owned compa-
nies and agricultural workers to provide
ﬁxed quotas of goods, but allows them to
use the rest of their output as they see ﬁt. 
Not all the conglomerates grew out of
ministries: some started as private compa-
nies but became big enough to require
state patronage. North Korea’s monied
elite provide them with cash and cream oﬀ
most of the proﬁts. The overseeing minis-
try provides protection in return for a
cut—a tax, in eﬀect. It is usually a ﬁxed sum
based on expected proﬁts.
Sanctions, ramped up in recent years,
have further encouraged the development
of conglomerates, says Andray Abraha-
mian of the Honolulu branch of the Center
for Strategic and International Studies, a
think-tank. He points to the example of
Myanmar. Sanctions that blocked access to
foreign goods and investment led, he ar-
gues, to the domination of the economy by
the well-connected. In North Korea, for ex-
ample, it is often relatives of powerful min-
isters and bureaucrats who own trading
companies. Jang Song Thaek, Mr Kim’s un-
cle, who was executed in 2013 for treason,
controlled ﬁsheries, coal mines and ex-
ports of other minerals.
Unlike his father, Kim Jong Un has not
tried to roll back the development of a priv-
ate economy or large, sprawling compa-
nies. Indeed, since 2013 he has stressed the
parallel development of nuclear weapons
and the economy. He has talked about
making more domestically and giving
choice to local “consumers”. In 2014 the
law was changed to allow managers of
state-owned ﬁrms to trade and create joint
ventures with foreigners, and to accept ﬁ-
nancing from private investors at home. 

1

2

The Economist Januar y 27th 2018 

The growth of conglomerates initially
increased competition: in addition to Air
Koryo, for example, a riding club, a ski re-
sort and a phone company also set up taxi
services. But the big ﬁrms are starting to
gobble up or squeeze out the small busi-
nesses through which poorer North Kore-
ans make a living. Seafood companies con-
nected to the army are putting ﬁshing
co-operatives out of business. 
Analysts reckon the big companies are
a prop to the regime, too. They not only pay
taxes, but can manufacture things that are
hard for it to obtain because of internation-
al sanctions. The wealthy are presumably
happy to have increased opportunities,
even if they can be withdrawn at the re-
gime’s whim (one of the reasons for Jang’s
execution is said to have been his eco-
nomic power). The Bank of Korea, in Seoul,
reckons the GDP of the North increased by
3.9% in 2016. 
But in the long run, a more “aspirational
society” and a healthy middle class may
lead to the country opening up, says Simon
Cockerell, who runs Koryo Tours, a travel
agency based in Beijing, and has visited
North Korea 168 times. These companies
have been able to grow thanks in part to a
growing consumer class, albeit mainly
conﬁned to Pyongyang. Sokeel Park of Lib-
erty In North Korea, a Seoul-based organi-
sation, reckons the development of new
centres of power, which follow economic
incentives, will ultimately increase pres-
sure on the regime. 7

The Rohingya diaspora

Unwanted
everywhere

K A R A C H I A N D K U A L A L U M P U R

Life is grim for Rohingya refugees in
Malaysia and Pakistan
INSIDE a cramped ﬂat beside a motorway
in Puchong, a suburb of Kuala Lumpur, 13
Rohingyas jostle for space. Rows of wash-
ing, rather than pictures, hang along grimy
white walls. Rubbish is stacked on two
mouldy refrigerators. The only furniture in
the main room is a sideboard stuﬀed with
bedding, for when the adults—who spend
their time doing odd jobs, such as collect-
ing waste or selling scrap—come back at the
end of the day to sleep on the ﬂoor. Several
are gaunt, and complain of eating only one
or two meals a day. With little else to play
with, a toddler sucks on a metal padlock as
if it were a toy.
Rohingyas are a Muslim minority who
live in Rakhine state in largely Buddhist
Myanmar. Over the past ﬁve months some
680,000 of them have ﬂed to Bangladesh
to escape a pogrom conducted by the Bur-
mese army and their Buddhist neighbours.

Asia 23

right to work or live in the country.
As Rohingyas in Malaysia cannot work
legally, they have little option but to scratch
a living collecting rubbish, or to take ill-
paid informal work on construction sites
and farms. They are vulnerable to abuse
from both employers and corrupt oﬃcials.
They have no access to public education.
Although those who are registered with
UNHCR get a discount on health care, the
vast majority have no option but expen-
sive private doctors. 
Similarly, in Pakistan, Rohingya men
tend to work illegally, as ﬁshermen, me-
chanics or waiters. Few children attend
school; child labour is rife. Outside a public
hospital in a well-to-do neighbourhood in
Karachi, a 33-year-old man is thankful that
the government does not know where he
is from. His two-year-old son has pneumo-
nia, and is being treated inside. If he had
admitted that he was Rohingya, rather
than a mohajir (a Muslim refugee from In-
dia) as he had claimed, he would have had
to turn to an ill-equipped private clinic. 
Politicians in both Malaysia and Paki-
stan have been quick to condemn the re-
cent violence in Myanmar. Najib Razak,
Malaysia’s prime minister, raised the plight
of the Rohingyas at a meeting with Donald
Trump in September and at several sum-
mits of ASEAN, a regional club of which
Myanmar is a member. Khawaja Muham-
mad Asif, Pakistan’s foreign minister, has
described events in Myanmar as a “chal-
lenge to the conscience”.
Yet very little is being done to make Ro-
hingyas’ lives easier. Malaysia has started a
pilot scheme to get Rohingyas into work,
but it has only 300 participants so far. In
Pakistan the odd politician has suggested
giving Rohingyas citizenship. But the peo-
ple of Sindh, the province of which Karachi
is capital, are not keen on the idea of com-
peting with Rohingyas for the govern-
ment’s limited resources. 
As the crisis rumbles on in Myanmar,
the situation for Rohingya refugees else-
where is unlikely to improve. Making
noises about helping the Rohingyas may
be good politics, particularly in Malaysia,
where Mr Najib will face voters later this
year. But the reality is that foreign govern-
ments see them as an unwelcome burden
on the state. “Malaysian oﬃcials in the past
have said explicitly we cannot make the
situation too comfortable here, because
more will come,” says Matthew Smith of
Fortify Rights, an NGO.
As a result, Rohingyas are typically kept
in a state of deprivation and uncertainty.
Surrounded by football trophies in a room
in Arkanabad, a Rohingya neighbourhood
in Karachi, Faisal Hussain, a 22-year-old
Rohingya, admits that he often looks at im-
ages of his homeland in Myanmar. “They
have greenery and lush farmlands,” he
says, his eyes welling up. “In my heart I
want to go back but I know I cannot.” 7

Lucky by Rohingya standards

They now live in crowded and unhygienic
shantytown camps just over the border. In
theory, the Burmese government is willing
to take them back, and has even signed an
agreement to that eﬀect with Bangladesh.
But few in the camps express a desire to re-
turn without plausible guarantees of safe-
ty and fair treatment in Myanmar—a far-
fetched notion given the hostility of the
Burmese army and public to their return.
On January 22nd Bangladesh’s govern-
ment admitted that it could not start the
process of repatriating them.
But the alternatives are hardly enticing.
Some 200,000 Rohingyas who ﬂed earlier
bouts of violence are thought to remain in
Bangladesh. Others have found their way
to diﬀerent countries. Precise numbers are
hard to come by, but it is estimated that
around 300,000 Rohingyas live in Paki-
stan, 250,000 in Saudi Arabia and 100,000
in Malaysia. All of the inhabitants of the
ﬂat in Puchong ﬂed Myanmar in 2012, after
the killing of a Buddhist woman sparked
bloody anti-Rohingya riots. People-smug-
glers took them by boat to Thailand, from
where they travelled overland to Malaysia.
Pakistan and Malaysia, however, have
not signed the UN Convention on Refu-
gees, which obliges receiving countries to
help those ﬂeeing persecution. Indeed,
Rohingya refugees tend to disguise where
they are from. Most Rohingyas in Pakistan
made their way there via Bangladesh in
the 1960s, when Bangladesh was still a
province of Pakistan. Others pretend to be
Indian Muslims, to take advantage of the
warmer welcome Pakistan accords such
people. The UN’s refugee agency (UNHCR)
has registered around 66,000 Rohingya ref-
ugees in Malaysia, giving them a special
identity card, but that does not confer the

24 Asia

The Economist Januar y 27th 2018

Banyan

Trading places

Why free trade is not a political millstone in Asia

solving labour disputes and allowing independent trade unions.
The biggest foot-dragger was Canada, the second-biggest
economy in the group (after Japan), which had wanted special
treatment for cultural industries such as television and music—a
concern for Francophone Canadians—and changes to the rules
on imports of cars. Canada has a big car-parts industry, which ca-
ters mainly to American carmakers. Now that America has
dropped out of the pact, fewer cars from this integrated North
American supply chain will have enough content from CPTPP
countries to qualify for tariﬀ-free access to other members. But
Canada will still have to open its market to Asian cars, subjecting
its car-parts ﬁrms to a one-sided dose of foreign competition.
In the end Canada’s concerns were met with a favourite TPP
trick: “side letters” between it and other members, that are not of-
ﬁcially part of the deal. One of them promised Canada greater ac-
cess to the Japanese car market. CPTPP’s members were suﬃ-
ciently determined to revive the pact, in other words, that they
gritted their teeth and compromised. 
How does CPTPP carry on, even as multilateralism has fallen
out of favour elsewhere? For some members, including Japan,
which has done most to keep the show on the road, there is a stra-
tegic imperative: to prop up the old rules-based order in Ameri-
ca’s absence. (The less-welcome alternative might be an order
overseen by China.) Bilahari Kausikan, a Singaporean ambassa-
dor-at-large, predicts that America will eventually return to the
partnership. After all, CPTPP (and TPP before it) is not typical of
the tariﬀ-cutting deals that Mr Trump claims have shafted Ameri-
ca. Rather, it breaks ground in setting American-inspired stan-
dards and safeguards for everything from online commerce to
creative industries. Mr Kausikan believes it is only a matter of
time before American ﬁrms are clamouring to take part.
Before then, others may seek to join an arrangement designed
to be inﬁnitely expandable. South Korea, Indonesia and the Phil-
ippines have expressed interest—even Britain has. And CPTPP is
not the only trade deal making progress in Asia. Japan has just
concluded a sweeping agreement with the European Union. The
Association of South-East Asian Nations is seeking to create a vast
free-trade area encompassing China and India, among others.

Fair blow the Asian trade winds
In Asia free trade is more popular than it is in America and much
of Europe. The question is why. One explanation is that in the
West, trade creates winners and losers; in Asia, at a lower stage of
development, it mainly creates winners, though some gain more
than others. 
Yet that is not quite right. Asia’s pell-mell development creates
lots of losers. It can be traumatic to be forced oﬀ your land to
make way for a palm-oil plantation or a high rise. Ineﬃcient rice-
farmers across the continent have much to fear from free trade.
Even in prosperous Singapore, points out Deborah Elms of the
Asian Trade Centre, an advocacy group, it is still an emotional
wrench to see nearly every landmark of your childhood vanish
in an orgy of rebuilding. 
The diﬀerence is that most Asians don’t have what Mr Kausi-
kan calls the illusion of choice. Trade is how billions of them have
attained a modicum of prosperity. And thanks to rapid, trade-fu-
elled growth, the drawbacks of opening markets seem relatively
insigniﬁcant. For as long as wrenching change is oﬀset by the
prospect of a better tomorrow, Asia will ﬂy the ﬂag of global trade
even when it is being furled elsewhere. 7

THE obituary of the Trans-Paciﬁc Partnership (TPP) was widely
written when Donald Trump pulled America out of the 12-
country free-trade deal on the third day of his presidency. Yet, a
year later and against all the apparent odds, the pact lives on. On
January 23rd its remaining 11 members met in Tokyo to thrash out
the ﬁnal details of pressing ahead regardless. The plan is to sign a
ﬁnal agreement in March, to come into force in 2019. It will be one
of the world’s most exacting trade pacts, measured by openness
to investment from other members, the protection of patents and
environmental safeguards. 
The pact’s resurrection is one of the more unlikely events in a
year of surprises. After all, America accounted for almost two-
thirds of the original bloc’s $28trn in annual output. Access to the
vast American market was what made other members readier to
open up their own. Moreover, Mr Trump’s retreat had sent a dis-
mal message about the prospects of the open, rules-based order
that America had underwritten. The Asia-Paciﬁc region had ben-
eﬁted more than any from that order in recent decades—yet Mr
Trump was declaring multilateralism dead and signalling an in-
tention to raise barriers to trade. Soon afterwards, he ordered
South Korea to renegotiate its free-trade agreement with America.
And this week he imposed punitive tariﬀs on imported washing
machines and solar panels, aimed at South Korean and Chinese
manufacturers (see page 12).
In spite of this forbidding backdrop, the dauntless 11—Austra-
lia, Brunei, Canada, Chile, Japan, Malaysia, Mexico, New Zea-
land, Peru, Singapore and Vietnam—have regrouped. In Vietnam
in November their leaders sketched out an agreement on the core
features of a revised deal. The pact’s name has changed, to the
Comprehensive and Progressive Agreement for Trans-Paciﬁc
Partnership (CPTPP), in case the original had tripped too lightly
oﬀ the tongue. But remarkably few (22, to be precise) of the origi-
nal provisions have been frozen. The victims are mainly stric-
tures insisted on by America. For instance, copyright has been re-
duced from 70 to 50 years. And special protections for biologics, a
booming category of drugs, have been suspended.
A few concessions were made to those still in the pact. Malay-
sia will not immediately have to liberalise its state-owned enter-
prises. Communist Vietnam can put on hold new rules about re-

China

The Economist Januar y 27th 2018 25

Also in this section
26 The per ils of rap music

Data pr ivacy

Public pushback

B E I J I N G A N D H O N G K O N G

Consumers and tech ﬁrms are taking privacy more seriously. The government is not
XU YUYU was a poor 18-year-old stu-
ﬁrms, Tencent, also dealt with a storm of
dent from the coastal province of
criticism after the head of one of China’s
Shandong when, on the eve of going to
largest car ﬁrms said Pony Ma, Tencent’s
university in 2016, she was defrauded of
founder, “must be watching” all messages
the savings that her family had painstak-
on WeChat, the ﬁrm’s popular social-me-
ingly accumulated for her. She died of a
dia app, “every single day”. 
heart attack that was caused, a court said,
Consumers in China have good cause
by the fraud. Ms Xu’s fate sparked an im-
to worry. Data collected through one medi-
passioned debate in China about data pri-
um can often end up in another. A man
vacy because the scammer, Chen Wenhui,
who talked on his mobile phone one day
had paid a hacker for stealing her personal
about picking strawberries said that when
details. He was sentenced to life in jail for
he used his phone the next day to open
theft of private information. 
Toutiao, a news aggregator driven by artiﬁ-
cial intelligence (AI), his news was all
China has a reputation for lax controls
over the gathering, storage and use of digi-
about strawberries. His post on the experi-
tal data about individuals. But sensitivities
ence went viral in January. Toutiao denied
about such matters are growing, and not
it was snooping but conceded, blandly,
just when information is stolen. 
that the story revealed a growing public
This month a court in the eastern city of
“awareness of privacy”.
Nanjing agreed to hear a case brought by a
government-controlled consumers’ group
against Baidu, China’s largest search en-
gine. The group claims that a Baidu app il-
legally monitors users’ phone calls with-
out telling them. At the same time, Ant
Financial, the ﬁnancial arm of Alibaba, the
country’s largest e-commerce group, apol-
ogised for a default setting on its mobile-
money app that automatically enrolled
customers in a credit-scoring scheme,
called Sesame Credit, without users’ con-
sent. The third of China’s big three internet

Cultural evolution
Anxiety about it is indeed growing, but
from a low base. The Chinese word for pri-
vacy, yinsi, has a negative connotation of
secrecy. Things that in the West are taboo in
conversation between strangers—for ex-
ample, asking about the other person’s sal-
ary—are often discussed in China. 
Such traditions inform behaviour in the
digital world. The Boston Consulting
Group says that in a dozen countries it sur-
veyed in 2013, three-quarters of respon-

For daily analysis and debate on China, visit
Economist.com/china

dents outside China stated that caution
was necessary when sharing personal in-
formation online. But only half of those
polled in China agreed. In 2015 Harvard
Business Review, a journal, tried to esti-
mate what value people in diﬀerent coun-
tries attached to personal data. It found
that Chinese would pay less to protect data
from their government-issued identiﬁca-
tion cards and credit cards than people
from America, Britain and Germany. More
than 60% of respondents in a large survey
conducted by China Youth Daily, a state-
owned newspaper, said that the default
settings in their mobile apps allowed their
personal information to be shared with
third parties. Chinese law did not deﬁne
what counts as personal information until
a cyber-security bill took eﬀect last year. 
Two things are helping to change public
attitudes. One is rising concern about on-
line fraud, a huge problem in China. A sur-
vey in 2016 by the Internet Society of China
found that no less than 84% of respondents
said they had suﬀered from some form of
data theft. The number of cases seems to
be rising. In 2017, according to Legal Daily, a
newspaper, the police investigated 4,900
cases of theft of personal information, re-
sulting in the arrests of over 15,000 people.
That is twice the number of cases and four
times as many suspects as in the previous
year. Worries about data theft are not the
same as concerns about privacy. But the
two sentiments often overlap.
The other big change is the surprising
emergence of China’s internet companies
as lobbyists for better data protection, even
though their motives are mixed. On the
one hand, the data they are scooping up
from consumers are becoming an ever
more prized commodity. The companies

1

26 China

2 want to use the data in pursuit of global
dominance in the business of AI. So they
have an incentive to collect as much data
as possible and support lax data-protec-
tion laws. On the other hand, consumers
in China are demanding tighter protection,
while their counterparts in the West,
where the Chinese companies are trying to
expand their business, have even greater
privacy concerns.
For the past year, companies have been
debating how to strike the right balance.
Now, it seems, consumer pressure may be
winning out. Frank Fan, a data-security ex-
pert, argues that recent events will prove a
turning point. “In the future,” he says,
“data-protection policies will determine
whether a company will succeed or not.”
Nie Zhengjun, Ant Financial’s chief pri-
vacy oﬃcer (yes, they have one) claims that
Chinese consumers are “no longer content
with preventing information from being
used for fraudulent purposes…Now they
want control in protecting their privacy.” 
The question is how these shifts in con-
sumer attitudes and company behaviour
will aﬀect the government, which is gath-
ering vast quantities of personal informa-
tion without the public’s consent. This in-
cludes DNA data taken from millions of
people, including all inhabitants of the
western province of Xinjiang. The govern-
ment’s aim is to use the data to help it to
strengthen social control. 
In 2017 the government launched an in-
spection campaign examining the privacy
policies of ten internet ﬁrms. At least ﬁve
were found to have improved data protec-
tion by making it easier for users to delete
personal information. This enabled the
government to boast about the security of
China’s data-protection laws and claim
that it was making personal information
safe from criminals.
At the same time, however, the cyber-
security law required that copies of all per-
sonal data gathered by operators of “criti-
cal information infrastructure” in main-
land China must be stored there. This has
fuelled suspicions that the government
wants to be able to gain access to them, ei-
ther covertly or by putting pressure on
data-storage companies. At the end of Feb-
ruary, Apple will comply with the new law
by handing management of the data of
iCloud customers in China to a state-
owned company. (The American ﬁrm in-
sists that “no back doors will be created
into any of our systems” and that it will en-
sure “strong data privacy”.) 
In the long run, the public’s growing
concerns about privacy must be at odds
with the government’s eﬀorts to create a
new form of surveillance state. But the
Communist Party shows no sign of con-
cern: it seems to be able to have its cake and
eat it. It is tightening data-protection rules
for companies, while making it easier for it-
self to grab more private information. 7

Music

Rappers’ knuckles
rapped

B E I J I N G

A genre’s popularity worries oﬃcials 
IN HIS bawdy rap song, “Christmas Eve”,
Wang Hao (pictured) switches from Chi-
nese to English when praising his friends
as “motherfucking dope”. Mr Wang’s fans
clearly think he is dope, too. In September
the musician (who uses the stage name PG
One) was named as the joint winner of
“Rap of China”, a hip-hop-themed talent
show on iQiyi, a popular video-streaming
site. During its 12-episode run the contest
racked up a whopping 2.7bn views, turning
its contestants into household names.
This year, however, those revelling in
their newfound fame are under ﬁre. In De-
cember Mr Wang was accused of having an
aﬀair with a married actress; in an ensuing
online furore, the Communist Youth
League tweeted an attack on “Christmas
Eve”, a three-year-old track that web users
had dug out of Mr Wang’s back catalogue
and that contained far coarser lyrics than
anything he had aired on the show, includ-
ing a reference to drug-taking. All his re-
cords have since disappeared from music-
streaming services—while they are re-
viewed and revised, he says. Mr Wang
apologised for the saltiness of his early
work. He blamed it on the inﬂuence of
“black music”.
Meanwhile fortunes are also shifting
for Mr Wang’s fellow winner, Zhou Yan,
who goes by the name of GAI. Since ﬁnd-
ing fame on the show, Mr Zhou had shown
no inclination to upset prudish censors by
returning to his gangsta-rapper roots. But
on January 19th he failed to appear in the
second episode of “Singer”, a star-studded
variety show onto which he had been

The Economist Januar y 27th 2018

booked. Netizens speculated that televi-
sion bosses had been ordered to yank him
from the series. Shortly beforehand Chi-
na’s media regulator was reported to have
circulated guidelines informing broadcast-
ers that they should not feature hip-hop
music or give airtime to people with ques-
tionable morals, undesirable ideologies or
(gasp) visible tattoos. 
Rap music is not new to China. Its popu-
larity has grown in ﬁts and starts since the
1990s. In 2014 the country’s leader, Xi Jin-
ping, said there was a place in China for im-
ported art forms such as rap as long as they
conveyed “healthy and upbeat” messages.
In recent years rap-style delivery has even
been adopted by the party in its propagan-
da videos. “Extensive consultation, joint
contribution and shared beneﬁts” was a
catchy line in a partially rapped ditty re-
leased last year in praise of China’s plans
for state-led investment abroad, the Belt
and Road Initiative.
Chinese rappers tend to avoid broach-
ing sensitive political topics. Yet the au-
thorities are clearly wary of the genre. Oﬃ-
cials in Beijing are keen to promote
Mandarin; they are not big fans of the local
dialects that many rappers use. They also
worry about the lewdness of some rap lyr-
ics—a pretext that was used for blacklisting
120 rap songs in 2015 (when members of
one well-known group were slung into jail
for several days, apparently for being too
risqué). Despite his approval of sanitised
cultural imports, Mr Xi is far keener on tra-
ditional Chinese arts. Foreign pop idols are
ﬁnding it harder to get permission to per-
form in China. Justin Bieber and Katy Perry
are among the most famous to have been
barred in recent months.
But the party’s puritanism is at odds
with the tastes of young Chinese. It is also a
headache for television producers. The cre-
ators of “Rap of China” had promised a
second series. If oﬃcials persist in keeping
colourful characters oﬀ-camera, making a
triumphant return will be hard. 7

Hip-hop star calls music “black”

United States

Shutdown politics

Power oﬀ

W A S H I N G T O N , D C

The brief government closure revealed deep splits among Democrats and an
increasingly poisonous debate over immigration
IF YOU want to shut down a government
ing manoeuvre. Democrats agreed to
as painlessly as possible, do it over a
reopen the government without getting
weekend. The federal government closed
their chief demand—a legislative ﬁx for De-
for business at 12.01am on Saturday, Janu-
ferred Action for Childhood Arrivals
ary 20th and reopened on Monday night,
(DACA), Barack Obama’s executive order
after the Senate passed a bill to fund it until
that shielded from deportation about
February 8th. This was the ninth such shut-
800,000 undocumented 
immigrants
down since 1980. Because the party with
brought to America as children, which
less power in Washington can usually de-
President Donald Trump cancelled last
rail the annual budgeting process, it will
September. Republicans, for their part,
not be the last. Familiarity breeds eye-roll-
loaded up the reopening bill with six years
ing. It is nevertheless remarkable that the
of funding for the Children’s Health Insur-
world’s pre-eminent power so frequently
ance Programme, which provides health
fails to pay for its government on time. And
insurance to poor children. Mitch McCon-
though the shutdown is over, the disputes
nell, the Senate majority leader, suggested
he would bring a DACA bill up for a vote
that provoked it remain unresolved, and
look likely to recur in the coming weeks.
before February 8th.
Republicans have an inherent advan-
Mindful of future primaries, and of the
tage in shutdown politics. The party’s ani-
more than a million people who took to
mating philosophy is that government
the streets in the Women’s March two days
should be smaller and do less. A closed
earlier to protest against Mr Trump, Demo-
government does less. When Democrats
cratic senators with presidential aspira-
back a shutdown, as happened this time, it
tions voted no. Ben Wikler of MoveOn, a
undercuts their claim to be the non-crazy
pressure group allied with the Democrats,
party of governance and regular order.
says that once the party had made the deci-
This bias towards stability can enrage the
sion to stand and ﬁght, the best thing to do
party’s left ﬂank, whose members have a
would have been to “make your case to the
grudging respect for Republican intransi-
public…Democrats and pro-DREAMers [as
gence. After the deal was done, demonstra-
DACA recipients are known] have a win-
tors chanting “Undocumented, Unafraid”
ning argument to make.” Polls back Mr
and “They say get back; We say ﬁght back”
Wikler’s claim. Majorities in both parties
packed the hallway outside the oﬃce of
believe that DREAMers, who are American
Charles Schumer, the Democrats’ leader in
in all but paperwork, should be allowed to
the Senate.
stay, either as citizens or as permanent legal
The blockage was cleared by a face-sav-
residents. But Michael Steel, who was

The Economist Januar y 27th 2018 27

Also in this section
28 Federal budgeting is busted
29 Stopping the supply of fentanyl
29 Gerr ymander ing in Pennsylvania
30 Dollar General
31 Race and horses
32 Lexington: Salting the earth

For daily analysis and debate on Amer ica, visit
Economist.com/unitedstates
Economist.com/blogs/democracyinamer ica

press secretary to John Boehner, House
Speaker during the last shutdown in 2013,
notes that “there is a diﬀerence between
popularity and intensity. Support for pro-
tecting the DREAMers is high, but support
for shutting down the government
to
achieve that goal is low.”
To hold out longer would have carried
particular risks for the ten Democratic sen-
ators up for re-election in states that Mr
Trump won in 2016. Voters in ﬁve of those
states received robocalls accusing their
senators of having “prioritised illegal im-
migrants over American citizens”. The lon-
ger the shutdown battle continued, the
more it would have deepened the ﬁssure
between elected Democrats from safe
seats and those at greater risk—and, per-
haps more important, between the party’s
activist wing and the centrist voters it
needs to take the Senate. As it is, the shut-
down’s brevity and the lunatic speed of
news in the Trump era means it will prob-
ably be forgotten by November when the
mid-term elections roll round.

Maine-stream
And yet despite all the energy of cam-
paigners, the fraught negotiations, the pos-
turing and the welcome emergence of a
moderate caucus, huddled in the oﬃce of
Senator Susan Collins of Maine, Congress
is not much closer to ﬁxing the status of the
DREAMers, which should be the easiest of
immigration questions to resolve. The Re-
publican stance on immigration seems to
be hardening. Mr Trump at ﬁrst urged legis-
lators to craft a bipartisan “bill of love”,
which he would sign. Lindsay Graham
and Dick Durbin, Republican and Demo-
cratic senators respectively, came up with a
bill that gives DREAMers a path to citizen-
ship, funds some of Mr Trump’s border
wall (his insistence that Mexico will pay for
it seems to have evanesced) and eliminates

1

28 United States

2 the Diversity Visa programme, which pro-
vides green cards for immigrants from
places that send few people to America. A
spokesman for Mr Trump said the presi-
dent would still not sign it.
House Republicans favour a bill that
would give some DACA recipients legal
status but not citizenship. It would also end
the Diversity Visa, bar immigrants from
sponsoring family members other than
spouses and young children of American
citizens (doing otherwise, Republicans ar-
gue, would let DACA recipients reward
their parents, who decided to enter Ameri-
ca illegally) and enact a host of other re-
strictions that could cut legal immigration
by up to 38%. That bill would never pass
the Senate.
The gap between the two parties illus-
trates how toxic America’s immigration
debate has become. During the shutdown,
Mr Trump’s permanent campaign released

an ad that snarled, “Democrats who stand
in our way will be complicit in every mur-
der committed by illegal immigrants.” The
ad conﬂates DREAMers—who by law can-
not have committed a felony—with crimi-
nals, just as the robocalls conﬂated people
who willingly entered America illegally
and those who came in their parents’ arms.
Despite the rancour, the contours of a
solutions are visible, if just faintly. Mr
Trump will release a “legislative frame-
work” on January 29th, based on four
“agreed-upon pillars”: a DACA ﬁx, border
security, and an ending to both the Diver-
sity Visa and to “extended-family chain mi-
gration.” The ﬁrst three should be just
about acceptable to most members of both
parties. The last is trickier. Democrats have
expressed some willingness to end family
migration for DACA recipients, but not for
everyone. Last weekend’s brief shutdown
may presage a longer one, next month. 7

The federal budget

Budgeting, busted

W A S H I N G T O N , D C

is too measly, Congress can instruct com-
mittees to write so-called “reconciliation”
bills to redress the imbalance.
In reality, Congress has not passed sep-
arate appropriations bills since 1996. Doing
so takes too many controversial votes. In-
stead, it tends to pass mammoth bills
which fund everything. Often, it cannot
even manage that. So it resorts to “continu-
ing resolutions”, like that enacted on Janu-
ary 22nd, which simply keep spending
ﬂowing at its current level while lawmak-
ers try to work out a deal (see timeline). Be-
cause continuing resolutions mostly pre-
serve the status quo, their prevalence
makes it diﬃcult for government depart-
ments to rejig their operations (which usu-
ally have speciﬁed funding streams). This
lack of ﬂexibility is particularly bother-
some for the Pentagon. 

America’s budget process swallows time but achieves too little
WRITING a budget should be about
imposing order. In America, it fre-
quently causes chaos. By letting funding
for the federal government lapse on Janu-
ary 20th, Congress demonstrated, again,
how hard it is for it to approve spending.
The disruption might be worth it if Ameri-
ca’s budget showdowns led to better poli-
cy. But they do not. Budget-making does
not bring income and outlays into line. It
does not allow lawmakers much opportu-
nity to weigh competing claims on re-
sources. And it fails to make long-term
planning easier. It is time for a shake-up.
The constitution gives Congress the
power of the purse. Four things are odd
about the way it uses it. First, annual bud-
gets cover only the roughly one-third of
federal spending that Congress has decid-
ed needs reapproval each year. Most enti-
tlement programmes, such as Medicare,
health care for the elderly, are automatical-
ly funded. So while budget-making pro-
vides opportunities for grandstanding by
Congressmen about long-term ﬁscal pro-
blems, the process aﬀords few chances to
tackle the principal cause: swelling entitle-
ment spending.
The second oddity is that the process
rarely follows the script, written in the
mid-1970s. Congress is meant to pass 12
separate bills funding each area of govern-
ment, like housing, defence and agricul-
ture. Each is penned by the appropriate
committee. If spending gets out of hand, or

BCA caps activated,
spending automatically cut
Two-month suspension of BCA spending cuts
Budget Control Act (BCA) passed

Debt ceiling hit/beginning
of “extraordinary measures”

Shor t-term budget deals

Source: The Economist

Regular disorder

United States

Budget negotiations

Government shutdown

(16 days)

The Economist Januar y 27th 2018

Reconciliation, meanwhile, is not used
to enforce ﬁscal discipline. Instead, it is pri-
marily a ploy for getting legislation
through the Senate with just 51 votes, rath-
er than the more usual 60. Many signiﬁ-
cant laws from recent decades, from Bill
Clinton’s welfare reform to President Do-
nald Trump’s tax cuts, relied on the proce-
dure. Lawmakers reverse-engineer the pro-
cess, estimating the cost of what they want
to pass in advance, and then issuing the
necessary instructions. For example, at the
start of 2017, Congress passed a budget res-
olution the sole purpose of which was to
facilitate the attempted repeal of Obama-
care via reconciliation. 
The third strange thing about the sys-
tem is lawmakers’ tendency to try, unsuc-
cessfully, to tie their own hands. For in-
stance, in recent years, budget-making has
been particularly painful because of the
“Budget Control Act” of 2011, which man-
dated deep and indiscriminate cuts to
spending should lawmakers fail to reform
entitlements. They did fail. The result has
been a biennial struggle to lift the law’s
spending caps temporarily, as happened in
2013 and 2015. Under a separate law from
2010, designed to deter unfunded legisla-
tion, Mr Trump’s tax cuts might have trig-
gered automatic oﬀsetting cuts to Medicare
and other programmes. Congress found a
way to avoid that in December.
The last and worst aspect of the system
is the leverage it gives minority interests. It
only takes 41 or more votes in the Senate to
block a budget bill, as Democrats demon-
strated last week. The budget process has
become a conduit for whatever dispute
lawmakers are determined to have, says
Molly Reynolds, of the Brookings Institu-
tion, a think-tank. In mid-2015 John
Boehner, then Speaker of the House, had to
pull a budget bill from consideration after a
late-night amendment to ban the Confed-
erate ﬂag from federal cemeteries.
Proposals for reform abound. Some
want Congress to move to two-year bud-
gets. Others want continuing resolutions
to apply automatically, making shutdowns
impossible. But many suggested reforms
would require lawmakers to limit their
own bargaining power. For politicians,
that is the budget that really matters. 7

BCA caps lif ted for
a fur ther two years
First concurrent
budget resolution
since 2009

Government shutdown

(three days)

BCA caps lif ted for 
a fur ther two years
Donald Trump
becomes president

2010

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

Debt-ceiling amendments

“Omnibus” spending deals

The Economist Januar y 27th 2018 

United States 29

Gerr ymander ing

Goofy’s gonna get it

W A S H I N G T O N , D C

Pennsylvania’s Supreme Court invalidates the state’s congressional map
IN 2010 Republicans won majorities in
Warshaw, a political scientist at MIT,
both houses of Pennsylvania’s legisla-
argues that Republicans hold three or
ture, which gave them control of the
four more seats than they would have
state’s decennial redistricting process.
without such an extreme partisan ger-
Like politicians everywhere, they drew
rymander.
districts to beneﬁt themselves; like chil-
The plaintiﬀs, led by the League of
dren left alone with a box of cookies,
Women Voters, contended that the map
they went a bit too far. On January 22nd
violated the state constitution’s guaran-
Pennsylvania’s Supreme Court held that
tees of free expression and association.
the state’s congressional map “clearly,
The court agreed. The ruling improves
plainly and palpably” violates the state
Democrats’ already rosy chances of
constitution, and gave legislators until
picking up the 24 seats they need to take
February 9th to redraw it. The judges
control of the House.
warned that if lawmakers could not
Some contend it also provides a blue-
come up with a map that the (Democrat-
print for future gerrymandering chal-
ic) governor approved, the court would
lenges. Unlike cases in Maryland and
draw its own.
Wisconsin, under consideration before
That the map beneﬁts Republicans is
the United States Supreme Court, Penn-
beyond question. In 2012 Republicans
sylvania’s plaintiﬀs relied on the state
won 13 of the state’s 18 congressional
constitution. That removes it from the
seats despite winning just 49% of the
purview of the conservative-leaning
statewide vote. They maintained this
federal Supreme Court; though the state’s
share in the next two elections with 55%
Republicans vowed to appeal there, it is
and 54% of the vote.
diﬃcult to see the grounds on which the
The freakishly shaped districts— the
Court could review the case.
7th won the nickname “Goofy kicking
Yet Democrats hoping to copy what
Donald Duck”—freely cross city and
happened in Pennsylvania elsewhere
county lines, dividing communities and
may be disappointed. Unlike most states,
packing Democrats into ﬁve seats that
it elects partisan justices. Since 2015
they win by large margins, while spread-
Democrats have held a 5-2 majority on
ing the rest of the Democratic vote as
the state Supreme Court (this week’s
thinly as possible everywhere else (a
decision was 4-3). Few other states oﬀer
practice known as cracking). Christopher
such favourable grounds.

American oﬃcials hope will stem the ﬂow
into the country.
The drug has long been used legally to
treat cancer pain, but in recent years has
ﬂooded into America’s black market,
where it is found mixed into other drugs,
punched into pills that resemble prescrip-
tion painkillers or, less commonly, sold on
its own. Fentanyl is very proﬁtable for
drug-traﬃckers: a recent Drug Enforcement
Administration report estimated that a ki-
logram of heroin sells for $80,000 on the
street, whereas a kilogram of fentanyl can
command between $1.28m and $1.92m. So
traﬃckers are highly motivated to push it
on their customers. Consumers often use it
inadvertently, unaware that it has been
stirred into their heroin or that their illicit
OxyContin pills are not what they seem. 
The Los Angeles warehouse represents
one of the front lines in the government’s
ﬁght to keep illicit fentanyl out of the coun-
try. “We and the warehouse at JFK (New
York’s international airport), we’re ground
zero,” says Rolando Knight, a veteran CBP
oﬃcer who supervises the Los Angeles op-
eration. In its illegal form, fentanyl is most-

ly produced in China. 
The drug’s potency means it can be con-
cealed in packets and boxes small enough
to be sent by international mail. Fentanyl
reaches America in two main ways. Some
is posted to Mexico, where traﬃckers usu-
ally mix it with other substances, such as
heroin and cocaine, before sneaking it
across the border and into the hands of
drug-dealers. In other cases, pure fentanyl
is sent directly to America, where at some
point it must pass through a facility like the
one in Los Angeles. 
Between October 2016 and September
7th 2017, CBP seized 299lb (136kg) of fenta-
nyl sent through international postal ser-
vices and private carriers such as FedEx,
UPS and DHL. During the same period the
agency seized 494lb of the drug on Ameri-
ca’s land border with Mexico, but it was of-
ten mixed with other substances. The aver-
age purity of
fentanyl shipped 
into
America by post is over 90%, compared
with 7% for that seized on the land borders. 
A visit to the Los Angeles warehouse
underscores just how manual the process
is. On a recent morning, an oﬃcer at the 

1

Drug traﬃcking

The powder room

L O S A N G E L E S

Fentanyl is both lethal and almost
impossible to keep out of the country
IN A cavernous warehouse near Los An-
geles International Airport, United States
Customs and Border Patrol (CBP) oﬃcers
process six packages per second. As card-
board boxes and manilla envelopes from
around the world stream through x-ray
machines, oﬃcers with handguns tucked
into their waistbands scan screens for
anomalies in the images. Last summer oﬃ-
cers at the warehouse found three live King
Cobras coiled into aerated potato-crisp
cans. On a recent morning they found
nothing creepy or crawly, only bags full of
dried orange skins and Chinese meat
snacks disguised as candy. Mostly, how-
ever, they found drugs: counterfeit Viagra,
vials of steroids and small plastic bags full
of unidentiﬁed white powders. 
Oﬃcers are particularly worried about
one drug: fentanyl. Kevin McAleenan, the
acting commissioner of CBP, says the drug
is the agency’s priority. A synthetic opioid,
fentanyl is 50 times stronger than heroin
and 100 times more potent than morphine.
The drug is largely behind the increase in
America’s drug-overdose death rate. Be-
tween June 2015 and June 2017, overdose
deaths rose by 34%. During the same per-
iod, fatalities linked to synthetic opioids
other than methadone, a category domin-
ated by fentanyl, more than tripled from
7,551 to 23,995. On January 10th President
Donald Trump signed the INTERDICT Act,
a law that will provide CBP with $9m in ex-
tra funding to look for fentanyl. On Febru-
ary 1st China will begin restricting two pre-
cursors used to synthesise fentanyl, which

30 United States

The Economist Januar y 27th 2018

2

Los Angeles warehouse squinted as he no-
ticed something ﬁshy about a package
passing through his x-ray machine. He
punched a red button to stop the conveyor
belt and picked up the package in question:
he could tell that it had come from China,
but it had no return address. He slashed the
tape open with a box-cutter and found a
paint-roller with dime bags of white pow-
der taped inside. 
The bags were passed to Jaime Pimen-
tel, another CBP employee whose job is to
test the substance. Behind him on a shelf
sat a box of Naloxone, an opioid-overdose
antidote, in case Mr Pimentel accidentally
ingests fentanyl or another opioid. He
pressed a machine called a TruNarc onto a

plastic bag full of powder and waited for a
reading. It came back inconclusive. Then
he used a metal scooper to sprinkle a small
sample of the powder into a more sophisti-
cated device called the Gemini, which re-
sembles a clunky Gameboy. It also failed to
match the substance to any of the 21 drugs
in its database, so the powder had to be
sent to a nearby forensic lab for further test-
ing, which could take a few weeks. “The
federal government has responded im-
pressively quick to the fentanyl threat,
which really didn’t escalate until 2015,” Mr
Knight muses. “But we’re still walking—
crawling really. It’s so hard to seize, that
when we do we almost have to say ‘Wow!
Good job!’” 7

Thr ift and proﬁt

One buck at a time

L EW I S B U R G , T E N N E S S E E

Dollar General thrives where low-income families struggle
“THEY want to build one every four
miles,” says the cashier at Dollar
General, a discount shop, in Lewisburg, a
small town in the rolling hills of central
Tennessee. Situated on a big parking lot,
next to a provider of payday loans open 24
hours a day, a supermarket chain called
Priceless and Dirt Cheap, another south-
ern chain of discount shops ﬂogging the
unsold or returned merchandise of other
retailers, the shop is one of three Dollar
Generals in Lewisburg. Tennessee is the
home state of Dollar General, which in re-
cent years overtook its rivals to become the
retailer of choice of low-income Ameri-
cans, so it has one of the denser statewide
networks of shops. Yet with well over

14,000 outlets across America (about the
same number as there are McDonald’s res-
taurants) almost 75% of Americans now
live within ﬁve miles of a Dollar General.
“Over the last ﬁve years a new Dollar
General opened every four-and-a-half
hours,” says Garrick Brown at Cushman &
Wakeﬁeld, a property agent. The chain’s
proﬁts have risen like a helium balloon
since the recession, to more than double
those of Macy’s, one of the most famous
brands in retail, in the past ﬁscal year. Its
market value is a whopping $28bn. 
How does Dollar General thrive when
so many other retailers are struggling,
downsizing or, in the case of Sears, Bon-
Ton, 99 Cents Only, Neiman Marcus,

Land’s End, Nine West and J. Crew, are
close to bankruptcy? One reason is that it
ﬁlled a void. “They set up shop where Wal-
mart does not want to make an eﬀort,” says
Christopher Merrett at the Illinois Institute
for Rural Aﬀairs, referring to the world’s
biggest retailer. Around 70% of Dollar Gen-
eral’s customers live in rural places which
have been slow to recover from the reces-
sion. Another reason for its success is that it
caters
to those who are ﬁnancially
stretched. Dollar General sells everything
from packaged food and toys to linens and
household-cleaning products, but in small-
er packages for those who cannot aﬀord to
buy in bulk. And although, contrary to
popular belief, not all items cost a dollar, a
quarter of them do; three-quarters cost less
than $5, and most of the rest will set you
back less than $10.
Dollar General promises low prices
and quick, convenient shopping, but so do
other dollar stores, such as Dollar Tree,
Family Dollar or the near-bankrupt 99
Cents Only. Their secret sauce, explains
Mike Paglia at Kantar, a retail consultant, is
to pick a good site. They vet them diligently,
opening their shops next to highways, post
oﬃces, churches or schools. (A church
close to the array of deep discounters in
Lewisburg assures its worshippers that
“God has a 100% refund policy”.) In Up-
town, a down-at-heel neighbourhood in
Chicago that is home to one of the few Dol-
lar Generals in big cities, the company
picked a spot behind a big parking lot next
to a Shell petrol station, a branch of Chase,
Chicago’s most popular bank, and
Planned Parenthood, a non-proﬁt oﬀering
advice on family planning. 
The typical Dollar General shopper is
white, working class and tends to rely on
some form of government assistance. “The
economy is continuing to create more of
our core customer,” the company’s chief
executive, Todd Vasos, told the Wall Street
Journal in an unguarded moment in De-
cember. He is also likely to be a supporter
of President Donald Trump, says Mr Mer-
rett, although this is changing as rural
America gains pockets of diversity, for ex-
ample next to slaughterhouses such as Ty-
son’s plant in Storm Lake, Iowa. Dollar
General has tried to expand in ethnically
diverse, left-leaning cities: in 2015 it tried to
buy the more urban Family Dollar. Last
year it took over 322 mostly urban stores
from a private-equity ﬁrm that had bought
them from Dollar Tree, which had
trumped Dollar General in the battle over
Family Dollar and needed to shrink a bit
for antitrust reasons. The new urban shops
will be laboratories for a diﬀerent type of
customer. On a frigid evening just before
Christmas, the shoppers at Dollar Gen-
eral’s Uptown outlet were mostly black or
brown—and almost certainly Democrats. 
Dollar General intends to continue its
vertiginous expansion, with plans to open 

1

United States 31

west, keen to cash in on the booming
ranching industry. “Ranching work was
challenging, manly and allowed black
people to make as much as whites. It al-
lowed them to do something that gave
their families some measure of equality,”
says William Loren Katz, author of “The
Black West” and 40 other books on Afri-
can-American history. Historians estimate
that of the 35,000 cowboys who ranged
the West between 1866 and 1895, at the
height of the cattle industry, between
5,000 and 9,000 were black. 
During the Jim Crow era blacks were
shut out of most rodeos. The cowboys in
the novels and ﬁlms that familiarised the
rest of America with the West were almost
always white. Without venues to compete
in or stars to inspire young black cowboys,
the tradition eroded. As Ms Vason-Cun-
ningham waits for the Bill Pickett rodeo to
begin, she estimates that fewer than 5% of
cowboys in the Professional Rodeo Cow-
boys Association, the country’s largest ro-
deo organisation, are black. The organisa-
tion says it does not track the ethnicities of
its riders, though it does ask about their fa-
vourite food: “I can tell you that for 99% of
them it’s steak.”
Appropriately, the ﬁrst event of the
night in Denver is steer wrestling. Before
entering the arena, Tory Johnson, a 32-
year-old from Oklahoma City, secures his
cowboy hat, shifts his weight from side to
side in his stirrups and tightens his grip on
the reins. He takes a deep breath and gives
a subtle nod. The gates spring open. On a
golden Palomino with a ﬂowing mane and
thick white blaze, Mr Johnson explodes
forward into the dirt arena in pursuit of a
steer that has been released in front of him.
He tips oﬀ his mount until his arms are
locked around the steer’s neck; then he
kicks both feet out of his stirrups, leans into
the steer and wrestles it to the ground—
with no use of teeth, it should be noted.
The whole ordeal takes 5.6 seconds. 7

The Economist Januar y 27th 2018 

2

another 900 shops this year. Yet rural com-
munities account for only 46m, or 15%, of
the population—and they are shrinking
fast. Many small towns have only 75% of
the population they had 25 years ago. In 33
counties in Illinois, the population peaked
over a century ago, says Mr Merrett. To
keep expanding so rapidly, Dollar General
will need to appeal to those with a higher
income than the working poor. It has al-
ready made inroads into more aﬄuent
groups. According to Nielsen, a marketing
researcher, 43% of customers with house-
hold income of $29,000 or less but also 23%
of those earning more than $70,000 said
they shopped at a dollar store in 2016. The
new shop in Lewisburg is on Yell Road,
which is lined with pretty houses and big

gardens; the cars parked in front of the
shop are mostly gleaming SUVs and big
pickup trucks. The “market” outlet oﬀers
fresh shrimp, Chobani yogurts and other
fancy foodstuﬀs. 
Walmart’s rapid rise caused resentment
in rural communities as it killed smaller lo-
cal shops and was said to treat its workers
poorly. Dollar General, however, ventures
into places where the last grocery shop of-
ten closed years ago, which is why its re-
ception by locals tends to be much friendli-
er. The same is likely to be true as Dollar
General expands into troubled urban
neighbourhoods such as Chicago’s South
Side, where rents are cheap. In these so-
called food deserts, an investment by any
retailer is good news. 7

Race and horses

Rodeo drive

D E N V E R

likes of Buﬀalo Bill and Will Rogers under
the stage-name of “The Dusky Deamon”;
he was the ﬁrst black man ever admitted
into the ProRodeo Hall of Fame. But where-
as Pickett’s talent was rare, black cowboys
during his era were not. They were funda-
mental to the settling of the West, both as
slaves and freedmen. In the ﬁrst half of the
19th century, white Americans in search of
cheap land ﬂocked to Texas, which was
then Spanish and, after 1821, a Mexican ter-
ritory. Some brought slaves with them to
work their newly established cotton farms
and cattle ranches. After slavery was abol-
ished, ranchers hired their former slaves as
paid workers.
Black people from the east also ﬂocked

The Bill Pickett rodeo aims to restore black Americans to the saddle
APART from the Missy Elliot and Ludacris
songs that blare through the speakers
in lieu of country tunes, the Bill Pickett In-
vitational sounds and looks like a typical
rodeo. In the dirt arena cowboys and cow-
girls cling to bucking broncos. They rope
calves and weave in and out of barrels. The
stands are packed with fans decked out in
cowboy hats and boots who nibble at bar-
becued chicken and gasp when riders are
thrown to the ground. At half-time there is
“mutton busting”, an event in which small
children are plonked onto the backs of
sheep and ordered to hang on as their
fuzzy mounts dart around the ring. The big-
gest diﬀerence is that all the contestants—
and most of the audience—are black.
The Bill Pickett Invitational, which per-
formed in Denver on Martin Luther King
Day and will visit ﬁve other places this
year, is America’s only touring black rodeo.
It was founded in 1984 by Lu Vason, a mu-
sic-industry promoter, after he attended a
rodeo in Cheyenne, Wyoming, and “didn’t
see a single rider who looked like him”, re-
calls Valeria Vason-Cunningham, who has
run the rodeo since her husband’s death in
2015. Vason decided to name the rodeo
after Bill Pickett. Born in 1870 in Texas, Pick-
ett was the son of a freed slave who invent-
ed the sport of steer wrestling, or “bulldog-
ging”. Pickett would gallop after a cow on
his horse, spring oﬀ, draw the cow’s face
into his own face by its horns, and latch his
teeth into its lip as he had seen herder dogs
do. The bite would confuse the steer, al-
lowing Pickett to pull it over with just his
jaw, his hands held skyward.
Pickett went on to perform with the

Yee-haw

32 United States

The Economist Januar y 27th 2018

Lexington

Salting the Earth

Scott Pruitt seems less deluded on global warming and more cynical. Whoopee

curb their emissions of—Mr Pruitt has recently sounded perfectly
respectful towards the scientiﬁc consensus on global warming. 
A similar shift, from outright rejection of climate science to a
more partial, opportunistic resistance, is evident across the con-
servative political-business elite that Mr Pruitt represents. There
are three main explanations for this change.
First, the scientiﬁc consensus on global warming has hard-
ened, making blanket opposition to it harder to maintain. If Mr
Pruitt tried to overturn the endangerment ﬁnding, for example,
he would probably fail. The ﬁnding followed a two-year EPA
study of warming-related risks, instigated by the Supreme Court.
To have a hope of rescinding it Mr Pruitt would need to get an
equivalent study to reach a less worrying conclusion, which
seems unlikely. In expectation of more environmental regulation
therefore, as global warming proceeds, many big emitters would
rather write the existing rules into their investment plans, ideally
leavened by Mr Pruitt’s revisions, than suﬀer the uncertainty of a
hapless eﬀort to scrap the endangerment ﬁnding, which would
invite a backlash from the next Democratic administration.
This was apparent in a recent debate on repealing the ﬁnding
by an inﬂuential conservative policy network, the American Leg-
islative Exchange Council. While a hard-core of ideologues and
some companies—including the sort of regional operator Mr
Pruitt was close to in Oklahoma—argued for repeal, bigger ﬁrms,
such as Chevron and ExxonMobil, were against it. Besides think-
ing it fruitless, many of the holdouts, including those two, are in-
creasingly investing in renewable energy and other schemes that
beneﬁt from the decarbonisation policies they formerly decried.
This growth of new economic interests from the environmental
policy regime is the second reason for the shift. Mr Pruitt’s recent
interest in methane regulation exempliﬁes that. 

How to please friends and confuse the people
The third reason for the conservative elite’s more nuanced view
of environmental policy relates to public opinion—and is de-
pressing. Having been subject to a decades-long misinformation
campaign against climate science, conservative voters are so reli-
ably sceptical they need no further priming. Until the mid-1990s
Republicans and Democrats were similarly worried about global
warming. But after a deluge of bogus science and conspiracy the-
ories swamped right-wing media, their opinions diverged: 66% of
Democrats now say they are very concerned about it; only 18% of
Republicans say the same. This has transformed the issue from
one of America’s least partisan, to one of the most, such that the
remaining 82% of Republican voters appear resistant to reasoned
argument on it: climate change is something lefties worry about,
so they by deﬁnition do not. That, in turn, makes life easier for op-
portunists such as Mr Pruitt. Where they once risked being found
out by their voters, they can now make whatever reality based
compromises they like, so long as they keep enraging the other
side. And Mr Pruitt is expert at that.
These forces help explain Mr Pruitt’s recent pragmatism, and
suggest his actions will be more moderate than his sceptical rhet-
oric suggests. Even so, he is weakening or scrapping most of the
protections he can, while also running the agency down. By one
projection, the EPA will cut its 15,000 strong staﬀ in half by 2020.
An EPA oﬃcial describes this approach as “salting the Earth, not
burning the place down.” That is hardly reassuring, considering
the environmental vandalism Mr Pruitt is doing, and the vandal-
ism to America’s Enlightenment traditions he represents. 7

REPUBLICAN administrators of the Environmental Protection
Agency have often sought to trim their powers. Anne Gor-
such, a Reagan appointee (and mother of Neil, a Supreme Court
justice) cut the agency’s budget by a ﬁfth, before being forced out
by a pollution scandal. But Scott Pruitt is the ﬁrst to make a non-
sense of his oﬃce. A former attorney-general of Oklahoma, with
close ties to oil-and-gas lobbyists, Mr Pruitt says he does not be-
lieve global warming is caused by human activity and proposes a
“true environmentalism”, which chieﬂy involves burning more
fossil fuels. Or, as he puts it, “using natural resources that God has
blessed us with”. Last month the EPA administrator visited Mo-
rocco on a mission to hawk American natural gas. This week he
was forced by the shutdown to cancel a trip to Japan, where he
was expected to visit a coal-ﬁred power-station and tout Ameri-
can coal. As the protector of America’s climate-stressed environ-
ment, he is either misguided or extremely cynical.
Which of those traits best describes Mr Pruitt could in theory
matter a lot. The administrator has spent a year chipping away at
the environmental regime of his Democratic predecessors. He
has withdrawn or tried to weaken over 60 regulations, including
Barack Obama’s landmark eﬀort to curb greenhouse-gas emis-
sions from power-stations. Yet he faces stiﬀ legal challenges to
many of those actions so long as the regulatory dispensation that
gave rise to them endures. This is the EPA’s determination,
known as the “endangerment ﬁnding”, that greenhouse gases are
harmful to Americans’ health. To make his deregulatory on-
slaught stick, Mr Pruitt would need to scrap that. And indeed, if
he believes what he has said about the harmlessness of carbon
dioxide and other industrial emissions—which most scientists
consider misguided at best—why wouldn’t he try?
Sure enough, Mr Pruitt has hinted that the endangerment ﬁnd-
ing is in his sights. As a possible probing attack, he has ﬂoated an
idea for a sort of climate-focused Scopes Monkey Trial, a televised
debate between climate change believers and sceptics. Yet he is
also giving contrary signals, which suggest his opposition to cli-
mate regulation may be more selective than it seemed. Well-
placed insiders know of no plan to review the endangerment
ﬁnding. Meanwhile, in arguing for regulating methane—a valu-
able greenhouse gas, which energy ﬁrms are therefore eager to

The Amer icas

The Economist Januar y 27th 2018 33

Also in this section
34 Honduras’s tarnished presidency
34 Jamaica’s lotter y scammers
35 Bello: How the middle class votes

Brazil

Not beaten yet

P O R T O A L E G R E

A court has conﬁrmed a guilty verdict against Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva. That may
not end his career
THE verdict was a bombshell but not a
surprise. On January 24th, with police
helicopters in the sky over Porto Alegre, a
city in Brazil’s south, and snipers on roof-
tops, a three-judge panel at a federal court
unanimously upheld the conviction of
Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva, a former presi-
dent, on charges of corruption and money-
laundering. Awaiting the decision, thou-
sands of his supporters camped less than a
mile away. They were both angry and deﬁ-
ant. “It’s political persecution,” insisted Ev-
eraldo de Souza, a construction worker
from the southern state of Santa Catarina. 
The court’s decision has big implica-
tions for Brazil’s presidential election, to be
held in October. Lula is the most popular
potential candidate by far. A recent poll
suggested that 36% of voters would back
him, double the share who support his
nearest rival, Jair Bolsonaro, a right-wing
extremist. The conﬁrmation of Lula’s
guilty verdict will not deter him from run-
ning. Indeed, he was expected to an-
nounce his candidacy as The Economist
went to press. The presidential campaign
has, in eﬀect, started in a courtroom. 
This means that the election, thought
by some to be the most important since the
end of dictatorship in 1985, will be a mess.
The ﬁcha limpa (clean record) law, signed
by Lula himself in 2010, bars candidates
whose convictions have been upheld by
an appeals court from running for oﬃce for
eight years. If Lula ﬁnds a way around that,

and wins, Brazil may face a constitutional
crisis. His candidacy would enrage voters
who think the right place to send him is jail,
not the presidential palace. Billboards in
Porto Alegre depict him in prison uniform;
40% of Brazilians would never vote for
him, the polls say. But if he is kept oﬀ the
ballot in the ﬁrst round on October 7th, the
slightly smaller group that supports him
will damn the election as illegitimate. 
Lula left oﬃce at the start of 2011 with an
approval rating of 83%. But in 2014 the
economy entered its worst recession on re-
cord. Then, in 2016, his protégée and suc-
cessor, Dilma Rousseﬀ, was impeached. In
September of that year Sérgio Moro, the
federal judge in charge of Lava Jato (“Car
Wash”), a vast corruption investigation,
agreed to hear charges that Lula accepted a
seaside apartment worth 2.2m reais
($690,000) from OAS, a construction ﬁrm.
In return, prosecutors alleged, Lula encour-
aged Petrobras, the state-owned oil com-
pany, to award contracts to OAS during his
time in oﬃce. Last July Mr Moro found Lula
guilty and sentenced him to more than
nine years in jail. The judgment was sus-
pended pending appeal. The appeals-
court judges increased the sentence to 12
years, but are not enforcing it immediately. 
Lula says the apartment was never his
and vigorously protests his innocence. He
accuses Mr Moro of plotting to deny him a
third term as president.
The original guilty verdict seemed to

energise Lula. He embarked on a tour of
Brazil, drawing enthusiastic crowds, espe-
cially in his native north-east, which bene-
ﬁted more than other regions from social-
spending programmes that he initiated.
This week’s aﬃrmation of the guilty
verdict begins a race by the courts against
the electoral calendar. The ﬁcha limpa law
can be invoked only after Lula registers as a
candidate with the supreme electoral tri-
bunal (TSE), which must happen by August
15th. Lula can appeal against any objection
to his candidacy to the TSE and then to Bra-
zil’s supreme court. In the meantime, he
can campaign. If the courts move slowly,
he could win the election only to have his
candidacy annulled by the supreme court,
perhaps triggering a new election. That
dire prospect will spur the judges to act
quickly, reckons Christopher Garman of
Eurasia Group, a risk-analysis ﬁrm.
If they bar Lula before September 17th,
his Workers’ Party (PT) could replace him
with another candidate. Gleisi Hoﬀmann,
the party’s president, says there is no “Plan
B”. In fact, the PT would probably put up
another candidate should Lula drop out,
perhaps Fernando Haddad, an ex-mayor
of the city of São Paulo, or Jaques Wagner, a
former governor of Bahia, a north-eastern
state. But the longer Lula stays in the con-
test before withdrawing, the more votes
his understudy is likely to win.
The prospect of an election without
Lula has cheered ﬁnancial markets, which
fear that he would resume Ms Rousseﬀ’s
spendthrift policies. After the news from
Porto Alegre, Brazil’s currency jumped by
more than 2% against the dollar.
Many of Lula’s foes would prefer him to
stay in the race, in part to persuade his sup-
porters to respect the outcome. “It would
be better for him to be defeated politically,”
said Brazil’s president, Michel Temer, to
Folha de S. Paulo, a newspaper. Even rival 

1

34 The Amer icas

The Economist Januar y 27th 2018

2 candidates may want Lula’s name on the
ballot. Mr Bolsonaro portrays himself, im-
plausibly, as the only man who can van-
quish him. “The chances of both are predi-
cated on meeting each other in the second
round,” says Mr Garman.
That is because a less divisive candidate
would probably beat either of them. Plen-
ty of people may be thinking of oﬀering
themselves for that role, including Geraldo
Alckmin, the governor of São Paulo state,
Henrique Meirelles, the ﬁnance minister,
and Luciano Huck, a television star. None
has so far made much impression on vot-
ers. Whether he is on or oﬀ the ballot, the
passions that Lula stirs up will dominate
the elections. “We won’t give up on him,”
says Danielle, a primary-school teacher
who travelled overnight to Porto Alegre ex-
pecting a negative ruling by the court. “He
lost the battle but hasn’t lost the war.” 7

Honduras

A tarnished
presidency

Juan Orlando Hernández has little
legitimacy, but few real foes
ANSELMO VILLARREAL was cycling
past a protest in Sabá in northern Hon-
duras on January 20th when he was shot,
apparently by a member of the security
forces. Mr Villarreal was the 32nd person to
have died in protests against the re-election
on November 26th of Juan Orlando Her-
nández as president of Honduras. In the
country’s last upheaval, a coup in 2009
against the then-president, Manuel Zelaya,
20 people died.
The post-election death toll may rise be-
fore Mr Hernández’s inauguration, sched-
uled for January 27th in Tegucigalpa, the
capital. But resistance is weaker than it
looks. The opposition Alliance coalition
had called for a nationwide strike, road-
blocks, a shutdown of international air-
ports and a vaguely deﬁned boycott. So far
little of that is happening. Demonstrations
on January 20th in Tegucigalpa and San Pe-
dro Sula, the second-biggest city, drew few-
er than 1,000 people each. That is a far cry
from the tens of thousands who came out
a week after the elections. 
That is not because Mr Hernández has
convinced Hondurans that he won fairly.
His main rival, Salvador Nasralla, a sports
broadcaster, led early in the vote count.
Only after a glitch interrupted the publica-
tion of results by the electoral commission
did Mr Hernández pull ahead, eventually
winning by 1.5 percentage points. That
looked ﬁshy. Election monitors sent by the
Organisation of American States (OAS) ob-
served widespread “irregularities and deﬁ-

ciencies”. Its secretary-general, Luis Alma-
gro, proposed a fresh election. Many
observers thought Mr Hernández’s candi-
dacy was itself illegitimate. It happened
only because in 2015 the biddable supreme
court ruled invalid the term limit written
into the constitution. 
Outside Honduras, almost no one is lis-
tening. The European Union, which also
sent monitors, described the election as
“well organised”. The Trump administra-
tion soon recognised Mr Hernández’s vic-
tory. The United States regards Mr Hernán-
dez, a tough-on-crime conservative, as an
ally in its ﬁght against drug-traﬃcking and
migration from Central America. Some
500 American troops are stationed at the
Soto Cano air base in central Honduras. 
Most other countries in the Americas,
including Argentina, Brazil, Canada and
Mexico, also backed Mr Hernández. They
dislike in general the idea of outsiders in-
ﬂuencing countries’ domestic politics. “No
government…wants to have their election
process challenged in the international
arena,” says an oﬃcial at a Honduran
NGO. That is especially true of the seven
that are holding national elections in 2018,
among them Brazil, Mexico and Colombia.
Some Latin American leaders regard Mr
Nasralla as a ﬂaky leftist. The main except-
ions to the regional rush to endorse Mr
Hernández are the left-wing governments
of Venezuela and Bolivia. 
Within Honduras, the opposition is not
trying very hard to overturn his victory.
Though he has called on supporters to
strike, Mr Nasralla has been presenting his
Sunday-morning sports show on televi-
sion. He appeared to concede defeat after
the United States backed Mr Hernández,
though without accepting the election re-
sult as fair. With Mr Nasralla’s retreat his
most prominent ally, Mr Zelaya, has public-
ly resumed his earlier role as de facto
leader of the opposition. 
Tegucigalpa is buzzing with rumours
that he has struck a private deal with Mr
Hernández. Mr Zelaya is thought to be
planning a presidential run in 2021. That
cause might be better served by amassing
inﬂuence and money with Mr Hernán-
dez’s help rather than by leading protests.
The president could give Mr Zelaya a say in
picking appointees to such important jobs
as chief prosecutor. He could allow Mr Ze-
laya’s Libre party, a constituent of the Alli-
ance, to gain control of congressional com-
mittees that allocate money. In return, Mr
Zelaya would wind down the protests and
let Mr Hernández govern.
Mr Almagro has been the loudest dis-
senter, for good reason. He led internation-
al condemnation of Venezuela’s drift to-
wards
dictatorship; 
to 
bless Mr
Hernández’s dubious victory would open
him to charges that he is applying a double
standard. The president’s friends accuse
Mr Almagro of seeking publicity to run for

Hernández, tough on cr ime and on voters

Uruguay’s presidency in 2019. 
His obdurate stand may have made
trouble for MACCIH, an anti-corruption
agency in Honduras set up by the OAS. On
January 18th congress passed a budget that,
in eﬀect, grants congressmen elected since
2005 three years of immunity from charges
of stealing public money. It hobbles
MACCIH, whose mandate expires in 2020.
On January 22nd Mr Almagro appeared
to give up the ﬁght, saying the OAS would
work “with the elected authorities”. Per-
haps he was being prudent. But his surren-
der leaves the country’s battered democra-
cy almost defenceless. 7

Jamaica’s lotter y scammers

Bad vybz

A state of emergency in a Caribbean
tourist hub 
MONTEGO BAY, Jamaica’s tourist capi-
tal, is also a hub for call centres. Many
work for American companies. But they
have less respectable step-siblings: people
who scam gullible Americans and brawl
with each other over the proceeds. The
worlds of scamming and tourism collided
on January 18th, when the government de-
clared a state of emergency in St James, the
parish whose capital is Montego Bay. 
Its murder rate is three times Jamaica’s
and 50 times that of New York City. Last
year 335 people died violently in a district
with a population of 185,000. Britain and
Canada have told tourists to limit their
movements outside gated resorts. 
One cause of the mayhem is scams in
which callers, using skills honed at St
James’s call centres and contact lists pur-
loined from them, ring up mainly elderly 

1

The Economist Januar y 27th 2018 

2

Americans to tell them they’ve won a lot-
tery. The prize is ﬁctitious; the fees paid by
the victim to claim it are not. 
The scam has lower barriers to entry
than the business of shipping Colombian
cocaine to the United States, another thriv-
ing activity in Jamaica. Weapons for both
come from the exchange of drugs for guns
with Haiti. Scammers ﬁght over access to
contact lists. Couriers bringing in cash
sometimes abscond, provoking revenge
killings. Gunmen rob scammers when
they pick up loot at remittance agencies. 
Some Jamaicans see little wrong with
bilking Americans. Adidja “Vybz Kartel”

The Amer icas 35

Palmer, known to his fans as the “worl’
boss” of Jamaican music, sang “Dem call it
scam, me call it a reparation.” He is serving
a life sentence in jail for murder. 
The government takes a stern view of
the violence that scamming leads to. Un-
der the state of emergency, the police and
army can search premises and detain sus-
pects without a warrant. The order sus-
pends habeas corpus and allows courts to
hold trials behind closed doors. Parlia-
ment can extend it after 14 days by a two-
thirds majority. That will require votes
from the opposition, but it looks as if the
government can count on those. The emer-

gency is popular with residents, even
though few think it is a cure for violence. 
Its success depends on how well the po-
lice and army put it into practice. The
omens from the police are worrying. At
Christmas they staged a “sick-out” to force
the government to raise their pay (they
failed). In January a prosecutor charged
two oﬃcers and other alleged members of
a gang with murder, robbery and rape.
The emergency started with the busting
of a contraband-fuel racket. But after two
days, gunmen killed one man and injured
ﬁve at a gangland funeral. Few tourists will
be tempted to explore St James just now. 7

Bello

Fear of falling

the past, Latin America’s middle class was
composed of independent professionals
and public employees. The new middle
class tends to work in the private sector, as
managers, technicians or owners of small
businesses. They are “aspirational and
emerging”, says Mr Walker. Many have
beneﬁted from globalisation. Some may
work in the informal sector; they think of
themselves as self-made. Rather than be-
ing genuinely middle class, some simply
have more money than they used to. 
A large middle class is often seen as a
guarantee of democratic stability: with
much to lose, it has an interest in property
rights, limits on state power and policy
continuity. But turmoil can precede stabil-
ity. Samuel Huntington, an American po-
litical scientist, noted in 1968 that “the true
revolutionary class” in modernising soci-
eties was the middle class, but that it be-
came more conservative as it grew. 
It is not clear whether Latin America’s
middle class will follow the same trajec-
tory. Historically, it tended to ally with
trade unions against oligarchic rule. But it
was
sometimes
counter-revolutionary.
Military coups against left-wing govern-

The middle class can promote stability—but not always
SOMETHING unexpected happened in
Chile’s presidential election 
last
month. In the ﬁrst round in November, Se-
bastián Piñera, a centre-right former presi-
dent who was the favourite, stumbled. He
won only 37% of the vote, six points less
than the combined tally of two left-of-
centre candidates. But in the run-oﬀ an ex-
tra 1.4m voters turned out for Mr Piñera,
giving him a comfortable victory. Many
of them had stayed away in the ﬁrst
round. Most were new recruits to Chile’s
middle class alarmed by the prospect of a
swing to the left under Mr Piñera’s oppo-
nent, Alejandro Guillier.
As Latin America begins a series of
presidential elections this year against a
background of sluggish economic growth
and anger over crime and corruption, the
Chilean result is a reminder that its mid-
dle class is bigger and more inﬂuential
than ever. But its political impact is far
from straightforward. And that is because
the term itself requires unpacking. 
What is clear is that the region’s mid-
dle class has grown. The World Bank as-
signs this status to people who have daily
incomes of $10-50, enough to oﬀer some
security. By this measure, 34% of Latin
Americans were middle class in 2015, up
from 21% in 2003. A further 39% had in-
comes of $4-10 a day. They were no longer
poor but could easily become so again.
This rise in income—the result of faster
economic growth between 2003 and
2011—went side by side with a big expan-
sion in education and in ownership of
durable goods, from computers and cars
to wide-screen televisions. Some 42% of
respondents to Latinobarómetro, a re-
gionwide poll, describe themselves as be-
ing “middle class”.
These “middle sectors” as Ignacio
Walker, a Chilean politician and political
scientist calls them, are heterogeneous. In

ments in the 1970s were backed by a mid-
dle class fearful of socioeconomic disor-
der. There is an echo of that in the support
that early opinion polls give among the
better-oﬀ and better-educated in Brazil to
Jair Bolsonaro, a right-wing populist. His
supporters blame the Workers’ Party of
Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva for an economic
slump that slashed living standards and
saw a rise in crime as well as corruption.
Nonetheless, many of the new lower-
middle-class Brazilians love Lula, whom
they associate with earlier economic
growth and cheap student loans and
housing credits. 
In today’s Latin America, the new
middle classes’ main demand is for better
services, from higher education to health
care and policing. But that doesn’t neces-
sarily imply public services, or a big state
and support for the left. “They oscillate
between ‘Let me progress’ and ‘Protect me
if I fall,’” says Sérgio Bitar, a Chilean for-
mer minister who advised Mr Guillier.
Take Bolivia, where a mestizo middle
class has grown under Evo Morales, the
left-wing president who has governed
since 2006. It has now turned against him.
After protests, this week Mr Morales with-
drew a new criminal code that was seen
as oppressive. In Mexico the middle class
twice voted tactically to prevent Andrés
Manuel López Obrador, a left-wing popu-
list, from winning the presidency. In this
year’s contest Mr López Obrador is striv-
ing to appear more moderate. As less ex-
treme candidates emerge in Brazil, its mid-
dle class may shun Mr Bolsonaro. 
This electoral cycle will show whether
Latin America’s middle classes have ma-
tured politically. If so, they will vote for
candidates of the left or right who oﬀer a
well-judged mix of opportunity, social
protection and stability. If not, Mr Bolso-
naro and his ilk have a chance. 

36

Middle East and Afr ica

The war in Syr ia (1)

Into the abyss

I S T A N B U L

Turkey’s oﬀensive in northern Syria complicates an already chaotic war
SEVENTY-TWO Turkish ﬁghter jets cut
called Operation Olive Branch, appears to
through the skies above north-west Syr-
enjoy wide support across Turkey. The me-
ia on January 20th, dropping bombs on the
dia have whipped themselves into a
Kurdish enclave of Afrin, while thousands
nationalist frenzy almost as big as the one
of Turkish troops massed at the border.
that followed an abortive coup in 2016. Of
They were joined by busloads of Syrian re-
the four main parties in parliament, only
bels, Turkey’s proxies in the ﬁght against
one, a pro-Kurdish outﬁt whose leaders
Bashar al-Assad’s blood-soaked regime in
have been locked up for over a year, re-
Damascus. So it was that Turkey opened a
fused to support the oﬀensive. Mr Erdogan
new front in the Syrian war, and in its un-
argues that an emboldened YPG plans to
ending conﬂict with Kurdish insurgents,
use the Syrian borderlands in the same
with reverberations rippling to Washing-
way as the PKK has used the mountains of
ton, Moscow and Istanbul.
northern Iraq: as a launching pad for at-
The oﬀensive pits NATO’s second-big-
tacks against Turkey. Most Turks seem to
gest army against a Kurdish militia called
agree with him.
the People’s Protection Units (YPG), which
Turkey says is a branch of its domestic foe,
the Kurdistan Workers’ Party (PKK). The
separatist PKK has fought an on-oﬀ insur-
gency against Turkish security forces for
over three decades. But the YPG is best
known for ﬁghting Islamic State (IS) in Syr-
ia. American support, in the form of weap-
ons and air strikes, helped the Kurds repel
the jihadists and, to Turkey’s dismay, take
control of vast stretches of land in the
north (see next story). When America said
it would create a 30,000-strong “border-se-
curity force” in north-east Syria consisting
largely of YPG ﬁghters, Recep Tayyip Erdo-
gan, Turkey’s president, vowed to “strangle
it before it is born”.
The incursion, which is inexplicably

The stubborn sultan
Mr Erdogan has ways of dealing with those
who do not. Having caught wind of possi-
ble protests, he pledged to “crush anyone
who opposes our national struggle” and
warned that police would be “breathing
down the necks” of those who took to the
streets. Dozens of people, including at least
ﬁve journalists, have been detained for so-
cial-media posts criticising the oﬀensive. In
Northern Cyprus crowds of Turkish na-
tionalists attacked the oﬃce of a local
newspaper that likened Operation Olive
Branch to Turkey’s invasion of the island in
1974—ie, an illegal occupation. 
The precise aims (and limits) of the op-
eration are unclear. Turkey’s chief of the

The Economist Januar y 27th 2018

Also in this section
37 The Kurds of Syr ia
38 Less aid for the Palestinians
38 Notes for former colonies
39 Integr ity idols
39 Political pr isoners in Ethiopia
40 Land reform in South Afr ica

For daily analysis and debate on the Middle East
and Afr ica, visit
Economist.com/world/middle-east-afr ica 

general staﬀ, Hulusi Akar, has said he will
push forward “until we eliminate every
terrorist”. Other oﬃcials liken the oﬀen-
sive to one in 2016 that saw Turkey wrest
from IS a 100km stretch of Syrian territory
west of the Euphrates river. The jihadists
hardly put up a ﬁght and local Arabs and
Turkoman welcomed the Turks as libera-
tors. (Turkish troops and Syrian rebels are
still in control of the area.) “We’re hoping to
repeat this example in Afrin,” says Bekir
Bozdag, Turkey’s deputy prime minister.
But the Turks will face a much tougher
ﬁght in Afrin. Around 10,000 battle-hard-
ened YPG ﬁghters are in the area. Local
Kurds, who are most of the enclave’s
600,000 or so residents, seem uniformly
hostile to the Turks and their Syrian allies.
The YPG has closed roads out of the city,
while the Assad regime turns back those
who manage to leave. According to the Syr-
ian Observatory for Human Rights, a Brit-
ain-based monitoring group, at least 28 ci-
vilians, 42 Kurdish ﬁghters and 48 Syrian
rebels were killed in the ﬁrst ﬁve days of
the operation. Oﬃcials in Ankara con-
ﬁrmed the deaths of three Turkish soldiers
and claimed to have killed 268 militants.
Rockets believed to have been ﬁred by the
YPG killed three people in the Turkish
towns of Kilis and Reyhanli. 
America is caught in the middle—and
sending out mixed messages. The Penta-
gon hopes to continue using the Kurds as a
bulwark against Islamist militancy in Syria.
The White House, though, has disavowed
plans to create a new Kurdish-led force and
downplayed America’s relationship with
the Kurds. In general, American oﬃcials
have been loth to criticise Turkey, but in a
phone call with Mr Erdogan on January
25th, President Donald Trump expressed
concern about the violence in Afrin. So 

1

The Economist Januar y 27th 2018 

2 says the White House, at least. A Turkish
source said no such concerns were shared.
While America loses leverage in Syria,
Russia is ﬁlling the vacuum. It has mended
its relationship with Turkey, which reached
a low point in 2015, when the Turks shot
down a Russian ﬁghter jet over Syria. Hap-
py to stoke tension between America and
its allies, Russia almost certainly gave the
operation in Afrin a green light. It may be
that in return Turkey looks the other way as
Russian and Syrian forces pound rebels in
Idlib, who are ostensibly allied with Tur-
key against the Assad regime. But some
think the Russians will eventually turn on
Turkey and cut a deal with the Kurds that
hands Mr Assad control of Afrin.
A more immediate concern is whether
the Turks plan to push into other YPG
strongholds. America has some 2,000
troops stationed in Syria, many in the
Kurdish-held north-east. If Turkish troops
start shooting at YPG ﬁghters in those ar-
eas, American soldiers could end up in the
crossﬁre. The result could be a direct clash
between NATO allies. 7

The war in Syr ia (2)

The precarious
state of Rojava

D E I R E Z - Z O R A N D Q A M I S H L I

Syria’s Kurds try to keep control of their
territory
ABU JABR waited more than three years
to exact his revenge. In 2014 the jiha-
dists of Islamic State (IS) murdered hun-
dreds of his fellow tribesmen in the prov-
ince of Deir ez-Zor. Mr Jabr returned to his
village in December, leading a group of tri-
bal ﬁghters. Backed by American air pow-
er, his men have driven IS into the desert
along the Iraqi border. The jihadists still
send car bombs into his lines, but he says
they will be defeated soon. American-led
air strikes are said to have killed up to 150 ji-
hadists in Deir ez-Zor on January 20th.
Mr Jabr’s men fall under the command
of the Syrian Democratic Forces (SDF), a
Kurdish-led alliance formed to defeat IS in
northern and eastern Syria. Armed and
trained by America, the SDF is close to vic-
tory. Its ﬂags ﬂutter over a quarter of the
country, much of which was once held by
the jihadists. But when Turkish tanks rum-
bled into the Kurdish-held western enclave
of Afrin on January 20th (see previous
story), the Kurds suddenly found them-
selves ﬁghting on two fronts.
Turkey’s anger has grown as the area
under Kurdish control expanded, over the
course of the war, to include even Arab and
Turkoman towns captured from IS (see
map). In 2016 the ruling Democratic Union
Party (PYD) declared the Kurdish-held terri-

Turkish troops/rebels 

T U R K E Y

Middle East and Afr ica 37

Afr in

Idlib

Manbij

Aleppo

Raqqa

Kurds

“Rojava”, area claimed
              by Kurds 

Qamishli

I R A N

Mosul

Erbil
IRAQ I
KURD IS TAN

100 km

Afrin
Reyhanli

Russian
air base

a
e
S

n
a
e
n
a

r
r

e

t
i

d
e

M

Euphrate

s 

Deir ez-Zor

Rebel-held 

S Y R I A

Government 

Islamic State

LEBANON

Damascus

ISRAEL

S p a r s e l y
p o p u l a t e d

JORDAN

Areas of control, Jan 2018

Source: IHS Conf lict Monitor

I R A Q

Government 

Tigris

Baghdad

tory, which abuts the Turkish border, a fed-
eral region called Rojava. It was not a move
towards secession, said the PYD, but a
model for the rest of Syria. The regime of
Bashar al-Assad dismissed the declaration
and the Turks seethed. But the Kurds, who
make up around 10% of Syria’s population,
have consolidated their grip on the north. 
Shahoz Hasan, the PYD’s joint chief, re-
fers to Rojava as a “democratic experi-
ment”. The party has empowered women
and set up village committees, in line with
the teachings of Murray Bookchin, an
American philosopher whose writings
have greatly inﬂuenced the Kurdish move-
ments in Syria and Turkey. But Rojava is
hardly pluralistic. The PYD represses critics
and other Kurdish parties.
The PYD’s leaders say they will never
again allow Rojava to be ruled directly
from Damascus. For decades the Kurds in
Syria suﬀered under the oppression of Mr
Assad and, before him, his father. Many
were stripped of their citizenship and de-
nied the right to own property. Others
were booted oﬀ their land to make way for
Arabs. Kurdish publications were banned
and private schools were prohibited from
teaching the Kurdish language. Little in-
vestment ﬂowed into the oil- and gas-rich
region. Instead the regime in Damascus
milked the fertile northern plains to feed
the rest of the country. As a result, the Kurds
are desperately poor.
Surrounded by potential enemies and
in need of support, the PYD has ﬂirted with
nearly all of the combatants in Syria. Its
strongest backer is America, which views
the PYD’s armed wing, the People’s Protec-
tion Units (YPG), as the most dependable
ground force against IS. America has given
it weapons and training, and deployed
2,000 of its own troops to the region. Fear-
ing a return of the jihadists and Iranian he-
gemony, America has promised to stay in
north-eastern Syria until a peace deal is
reached. The PYD does not think it will al-
low the Turks to go beyond Afrin.
Russia, which backs Mr Assad, proba-
bly blessed the Turkish operation, if only to

spite America. In response, the PYD said it
would probably not attend Russian-spon-
sored peace talks at the end of January.
Still, Russia and Mr Assad may see a poten-
tial partner in the PYD, which has accepted
Russian military support and maintained
ties to the regime. The group is regarded as
more pragmatic than the other rebel out-
ﬁts. When Mr Assad’s forces retreated from
areas in the north, they made sure to hand
them to the PYD. One could imagine the re-
gime and the Kurds supporting a deal that
keeps Mr Assad in power and grants Ro-
java autonomy.
But the Kurds will probably have to con-
cede some of their gains in order to keep
most of Rojava. Any deal would probably
require Kurdish forces to be folded into the
national army; captured oilﬁelds to be re-
turned to the central government; and
seized Arab lands to be given up. “If real ne-
gotiations happen we will talk about all
these things,” says Mr Hasan. “We are al-
ways open for discussions.” First, though,
he must deal with the Turks. 7

Kurds curse Turkey

 
38 Middle East and Afr ica

Palestinian refugees

Stripping the Strip

C A I R O

Is America wrong to cut aid to
Palestinian refugees?
ATRIP billed as a show of support for
Christians had a noticeable lack of
them. On January 22nd Mike Pence, Amer-
ica’s vice-president, landed in Israel on the
last leg of a three-country jaunt. Originally
scheduled for December, it was delayed
after Donald Trump made the controver-
sial decision to recognise Jerusalem as Isra-
el’s capital. When Mr Pence arrived at last,
the Palestinians blackballed him. So did
Christian leaders in Egypt and Jordan. Mr
Pence, a devout Christian himself, did not
even set foot in a church in the Holy Land.
No one was sure why he came. His
meetings with Israeli and Arab leaders
were routine, save for a speech in the Knes-
set, where he announced that America
would move its embassy to Jerusalem by
the end of 2019. The trip seemed to be
about domestic politics: for Mr Pence, a
nod to his evangelical base; for Binyamin
Netanyahu, Israel’s scandal-plagued prime
minister, a chance to look like a statesman.
And the Palestinians got to snub an ad-
ministration they now see as biased. Apart
from Jerusalem, they are also fuming over
cuts to the UN Relief and Works Agency
(UNRWA), which aids Palestinian refugees.
In January Mr Trump suspended $65m,
about half of America’s next scheduled
payment, plus $45m in emergency food aid
that it had pledged. The cuts will bite. In
2016 America was the agency’s largest do-
nor. It paid 30% of UNRWA’s budget of
$1.2bn, more than twice as much as the EU.
The agency was founded in 1949 to oﬀer
temporary aid to 750,000 Palestinians dis-
placed by the creation of Israel. Like so
much else in this intractable conﬂict, it has
become permanent. Because the UN
deems the descendants of Palestinian refu-
gees to be refugees, too, their number has
swelled to more than 5m.
In Lebanon, most lack citizenship and
live in grim camps. The government says it
cannot aﬀord to give them social services;
they are also barred from some jobs. Some
Lebanese fear that granting citizenship to
so many Sunni Muslims would upset their
country’s delicate sectarian balance. Those
fears may be overblown: a census released
in December
found that only about
175,000 Palestinian refugees still live in
Lebanon, one-third of previous estimates.
They have fared better in Jordan, but
400,000-plus live in camps.
Many still hope to go back to their an-
cestral homes. This “right of return” is
among the conﬂict’s most emotive issues.

The Economist Januar y 27th 2018

Yet the agency also lets Israel indulge a
fantasy. Since 2007 it has maintained a
punishing military blockade on Gaza (as
has Egypt). The consequences have been
stark. Unable to export goods, hundreds of
Gazan factories and farms have closed.
Most of Gaza’s 2m people have been un-
able to leave their tiny enclave for a de-
cade. Water is undrinkable and electricity
available only for a few hours a day. Even
the Israeli army now reckons the blockade
is ineﬀective at best, counter-productive at
worst. Ironically, foreign aid lets it persist.
Half of Gaza’s people rely on UNRWA for
food, 262,000 students are enrolled in its
schools and its clinics handle more than
4m patient visits a year. 
Pierre Krahenbuhl, UNRWA’s head,
calls America’s cuts “abrupt and harmful”.
While Mr Pence was touring the region, the
agency launched an appeal called “dignity
is priceless.” It hopes to raise an extra
$500m. Yet there is little dignity to be
found in places like Gaza’s Shati camp,
where the smell of untreated sewage lin-
gers over the teeming alleyways. UNRWA
does admirable work in such places—liter-
ally keeping millions of people alive. It also
shields all parties from the consequences
of prolonging the conﬂict. 7

He has nothing left to lose

Israel, worried about its own demography,
will permit only a token homecoming un-
der a future peace deal. In private, Palestin-
ian leaders doubt their state could handle a
huge inﬂux of new citizens. Israel and its
defenders often fault UNRWA for letting
Palestinians nurture this distant hope.

Afr ica’s CFA franc

Franc exchange

D A K A R

AT L AN T I C
O C EAN

Dakar

GUINEA-
BISSAU

CFA franc currenc ies

West Afr ican

Central Afr ican

BURKINA
FASO

LIBYA

SENEGAL

MALI

NIGER

CHAD

SUDAN

BENIN
NIGERIA
TOGO
CAMEROON

C A R

IVORY
COAST
GHANA
EQUATORIAL GUINEA
G u l f o f G u i n e a

GABON

 CONGO-
 BRAZZAVILLE

A French-backed currency comes under ﬁre
DEBATING the merits of the CFA franc,
says Guy Marius Sagna, a Senegalese
activist, “is like discussing the advantages
and disadvantages of slavery.” That is a ri-
diculous analogy. But the past year has
seen protests in several cities against the
currency, used by 14 countries in west and
central Africa and supported by France, the
former colonial power. One ﬁrebrand was
deported from Senegal after burning a CFA
franc note. A director of La Francophonie, a
union of French-speaking nations, was
suspended after writing an explosive arti-
cle on the topic. The agitators are few, but
they have hit a nerve.
To its critics, the CFA franc is a colonial
anachronism; to its defenders, a bulwark
of stability. Established under French rule,
it is actually two distinct currencies. A cen-
tral African bloc, oil-soaked and despotic,
uses one; the other circulates in eight
poorer, more open countries to the west
(see map). Both are pegged to the euro,
with convertibility guaranteed by France.
Countries in each zone pool their foreign-
exchange reserves, of which half must be
deposited with the French treasury. French

delegates sit on the central banks’ boards.
This peculiar system has brought stabil-
ity. Over the past 50 years inﬂation has av-
eraged 6% in Ivory Coast, which uses the
CFA franc, and 29% in neighbouring Gha-
na, which does not. It eases trade with Eu-
rope, the region’s biggest partner, and frees
foreign investors from the risks of ex-
change-rate ﬂuctuations.
Where some see an anchor, others see a
millstone. To maintain the euro peg, notes
Ndongo Samba Sylla, a Senegalese econo-
mist, these very poor countries must track
the hawkish monetary policy of the Euro-

1

The Economist Januar y 27th 2018 

2 pean Central Bank. Since the introduction
of the euro, income per person in the franc
zone has grown at 1.4% a year, compared
with 2.5% in all of sub-Saharan Africa.
Blaming the currency for slow develop-
ment is “absurd”, says Ismaël Dem, direc-
tor general of economy and currency at the
west African central bank. He argues that
the exchange rate is where it should be and
that countries such as Ivory Coast are
booming. But the franc zone still depends,
as in colonial days, on the export of raw
materials. And the central African coun-
tries, despite sharing a currency, export
more to France than they do to each other.
Calls for reform are becoming louder.
Carlos Lopes, a former executive secretary
of the UN Economic Commission for Afri-
ca, advocates tying the CFA franc to a bas-
ket of currencies, such as the dollar and
yuan. Others think the exchange rate
should ﬂuctuate around a target. Radicals

want France out of the currency altogether.
Yet elites do rather well out of the sys-
tem, which makes it easier to send wealth
abroad. And a weaker currency would in-
crease the cost of imported goods. The
only devaluation, in 1994, sparked riots.
The recent history of the central African
zone is telling. A slump in oil prices from
2014 widened ﬁscal and current-account
deﬁcits, putting pressure on the peg. Re-
serves covered just over two months of im-
ports at the end of 2016. Yet most leaders
signed onto IMF programmes to cut spend-
ing rather than move the exchange rate. 
In west Africa, meanwhile, politicians
pay lip service to the idea of a single cur-
rency for all countries in the region. But
that would require small oil importers to
throw in their lot with Nigeria, a huge oil
exporter. Although the CFA franc is un-
loved, the alternatives are risky. It will sur-
vive for some time yet. 7

Integr ity idols

Good clean entertainment

Can a reality TV show discourage corruption?
THE timing could not have been better.
In the same week as two civil servants
in Nigeria appeared in court for embez-
zling funds earmarked for International
Anti-Corruption Day, the ﬁnalists of
“Integrity Idol” were announced. In this
reality television show, honest civil
servants working in corrupt countries
compete for glory, fame and, occasional-
ly, a live chicken. The show is a hit: over
10m people have watched it and more
than 400,000 have cast their votes in
favour of their Integrity Idols.
“Integrity Idol” started in Nepal in
2014 and has since spread to Pakistan,
Mali, Liberia, Nigeria and South Africa.
Five ﬁnalists, vetted by a panel of judges,
are chosen to be interviewed. They ex-
plain why they deserve the prize. “I come
to work late. My boss could ask ‘Why are
you late?’ (…) I say I slept a little longer.
Say it the way it is! Face the conse-
quences!” one nominee exhorts. 
It is not always easy to ﬁnd good
contestants. The Nigerian nomination
period was extended because of the poor
quality of entrants. “People were nomi-
nating their auntie because she gave
them money,” says Odeh Friday, who
runs the campaign. Others thought they
qualiﬁed because they came to work on
time. One policeman was surprised by
his nomination because, he explained,
he was involved in shady contracts.
Another nominee resigned after he real-
ised that background checks might dig up
old dirt. 
“Integrity Idol” claims to steer clear of

politics. Elected oﬃcials may not be
nominated. Nor, in some countries, may
people in the army. Even so, the show
delivers a punch in the face to crooked
politicians and their cronies, sometimes
just by its timing: in Liberia last year, it
aired while presidential elections were
embroiled in fraud investigations.
It is diﬃcult to know what impact the
show is having, though the Massachu-
setts Institute of Technology has begun to
measure it. Change may be gradual.
Gareth Newham at the Institute of Secu-
rity Studies in South Africa thinks its
greatest contribution will be in changing
attitudes. “Too many young people be-
lieve that you can only get a job if you
belong to the [ruling party]. What has
been missing is a focus on the ordinary
people who do good work.” 

Middle East and Afr ica 39

Political pr isoners in Ethiopia

Setting them free

A D D I S A B A B A

The regime ﬂirts with letting dissidents
speak without locking them up
LIFE in Maekelawi, a prison in Addis Aba-
ba, the capital of Ethiopia, had a predict-
able rhythm. Three times a day, Atnaf Ber-
hane and Befekadu Hailu were hauled
from the dank, dark cell they nicknamed
“Siberia” for three hours of interrogation
and beating. Mr Hailu was ﬂogged across
his bare feet with an electric cable. Mr Ber-
hane escaped this particular cruelty. “I was
lucky,” he says.
The two Ethiopian activists, members
of a blogging group known as Zone 9, were
arrested in 2014. After three months in
Maekelawi they were charged with terro-
rism. After 18 months behind bars those
charges were dropped, though both are
still accused of the lesser crime of inciting
violence. Ethio Trial Tracker, a website,
claims that 923 Ethiopians are in prison on
terrorism charges. Human Rights Watch, a
pressure group, counts thousands more
detained for their political opinions.
The ruling Ethiopian People’s Revolu-
tionary Democratic Front (EPRDF) has a
habit, always denied, of jailing its political
opponents. So many observers were sur-
prised when, on January 3rd, the govern-
ment announced plans to release some po-
litical prisoners, turn Maekelawi into a
museum and “widen the democratic
space”. On January 17th it freed Merera Gu-
dina, the country’s most prominent oppo-
sition leader, along with 527 other prison-
ers. The attorney-general said more
prisoners would be released in the coming
months, including some of those convict-
ed of terrorist oﬀences. “If the government
means what it says, then it has a chance to
write a new chapter in Ethiopian history,”
says Mr Merera. Since his release thou-
sands have come to see him, some bring-
ing oxen to slaughter in the festivities.
After years of anti-government protests
and a nine-month state of emergency that
was lifted last August, some detect signs of
change inside the EPRDF. For months the
party blamed dissent on “foreign ene-
mies” and local malcontents. But
this
month it issued a statement admitting to
“mistakes” and promising more democra-
cy. The anti-terror law is being revised and
other repressive bills may be changed. 
Yet one should not read too much into
all this. Most of the prisoners whose cases
were dropped were minor ﬁgures. Promi-
nent activists from Oromia and Amhara,
the country’s two most populous regions
and hotbeds of unrest, are still being held.
Any changes made to draconian laws will 

1

40 Middle East and Afr ica

2 probably be minor. And abuses continue:
on January 20th government forces killed
at least seven people at a religious festival. 
More signiﬁcant is the power struggle
within the EPRDF, a coalition of four ethni-
cally-based parties. The Tigrayan People’s
Liberation Front (TPLF) has long wielded
inﬂuence disproportionate to the number
of Tigrayans, who are about 6% of the pop-
ulation. But this may change. The Oromo
People’s Democratic Organisation, which
is also part of the ruling coalition, was seen
for years as a puppet of the TPLF. Yet it has
rebranded itself as a populist, quasi-oppo-
sition movement. Under Lemma Megersa,
its charismatic new leader, it has adopted
many of the protesters’ demands, includ-
ing the release of political prisoners. 
The embattled prime minister, Haile-
mariam Desalegn, may soon resign. If so, a
successor must be found before the EPRDF
congress scheduled for March, but sure to
be postponed. Many in Oromia want it to
be Mr Lemma, the country’s most popular
politician. Yet the EPRDF is bitterly at odds
over the succession. Fetsum Berhane, a
sympathetic
commentator, wonders
whether it has enough zeal to reform. “I’m
not sure anybody is ﬁghting over any ide-
als or issues except power,” he says. 7

Land in South Afr ica

Dreams of ﬁelds

H O E D S P R U I T

South Africa gets land reform wrong
HANNES BOOYENS, clad in the khaki
shorts and shirt of the Afrikaner farm-
er, shows oﬀ tidy rows of trees hanging
heavy with grapefruits, soon to be plucked
for export. Hezekiel Nkosi, the chairman of
the Moletele Communal Property Associa-
tion, which owns the land and employs Mr
Booyens, nods approvingly. “We are hap-
py,” Mr Nkosi says. “We need the best tech-
nology, the best farm managers. Other-
wise this is a fruitless operation.”
The Moletele people were forced from
this land, a picturesque corner of South Af-
rica’s Limpopo province, mainly in the
1950s and 60s. They got back 7,000 hect-
ares of citrus and mango farms in 2007
after a legal claim but struggled to run
them. One of the farms collapsed. Mole-
tele leaders went looking for help. The Vu-
melana Advisory Fund, a non-proﬁt that
helps land reform projects, appointed ad-
visers to develop a commercial partner-
ship. The Moletele community now has
access to capital and expertise. Young peo-
ple are being trained so they can run the
farms in future. “The best way was to
partner with those that have the skills,” Mr

Nkosi says.
Under colonial rule and then apart-
heid, black South Africans were systemati-
cally pushed oﬀ the land. Whites still own
much of it. Righting this historical injustice
has been a creakingly slow process over 24
years of democracy. The government
promised to transfer 30% of white-owned
farmland to blacks by 1999; most estimates
reckon it has only transferred 10%. This
dawdling pace, combined with a stagnant
economy and rising unemployment (it re-
cently hit 37%), provides fertile ground for
populist politicians. Loudest has been the
Economic Freedom Fighters, a thuggish op-
position party appealing to poor blacks
with promises of nationalised banks and
the conﬁscation of white-owned land.
That, in turn, is pushing the ruling African
National Congress (ANC) to sharpen its
rhetoric. At a conference in December the
party adopted a policy of changing the
constitution to allow it to conﬁscate land
without compensation. 
Cyril Ramaphosa, the ANC’s business-
friendly new leader and its candidate in
presidential elections in 2019, has cautious-
ly tried to walk a tightrope between radi-
cals in his own party and economic catas-
trophe. Expropriation could “make this
country the garden of Eden”, he has said,
but with big caveats: it must not under-
mine the economy, agricultural produc-
tion or food security. 
That is code for not copying Robert Mu-
gabe, the former president of neighbour-
ing Zimbabwe. When Mr Mugabe started
grabbing white-owned commercial farms
in 2000, he destroyed far more than a suc-
cessful agricultural 
industry. He also
smashed what was once one of southern
Africa’s most diversiﬁed economies. Min-
ing, tourism and manufacturing all col-
lapsed within a few years.
For all its ﬁery rhetoric, the ANC govern-
ment has shown remarkably little vigour
in using the laws it already has. Its alloca-
tion for buying land for redistribution has
slumped to less than 0.1% of the national
budget. And it is sitting on as many as
4,000 farms that it has bought but not yet
handed over to black owners.

The Economist Januar y 27th 2018

The government’s failures do not stop
there. Many of the farms that have been
handed over have since failed because the
new owners do not have the skills needed
to run large commercial farms. As much as
70% of the estimated 8m hectares of land
transferred by the state since the end of
apartheid is now fallow. 
Instead of ﬁxing its shortcomings, the
government is exacerbating them. In re-
cent years it has stopped transferring own-
ership of land to black farmers because it
frets they may sell it to whites. Instead it
now leases the land to black tenants. With-
out assets to borrow against, these new
farmers ﬁnd it diﬃcult to get capital.
Yet if done well, land reform could
salve open wounds. The question is how
to do it well. Peter Setou, the chief execu-
tive of the Vumelana Advisory Fund, says
that partnerships between private inves-
tors and communities that are given land
seem to work. But confusion around the
ANC’s policy on land expropriation deters
would-be investors. “We cannot have this
level of uncertainty,” he says. 
Under another model, known as the
50/50 framework, the government buys
land and leases it back to a company co-
owned by the farmer and farm workers.
Andrew Braithwaite, a ﬁfth-generation
farmer, took part in a project that saw long-
time workers on his sugar cane farm in
KwaZulu-Natal province become co-own-
ers of a farming business. “People feel they
have something to lose,” he says. “It adds
stability to the nation.”
It isn’t just a matter of farms changing
hands. Mr Ramaphosa says that
land
owned by government departments and
municipalities should be released for
housing. That would make it easier for peo-
ple to move to cities, where the jobs are. 
As it is, farming generates about 2% of
GDP. Voters may like the idea of land redis-
tribution, but not as much as they want
good jobs in the city. That is even true for
those who were kicked oﬀ their land dur-
ing apartheid: most of those who have
lodged claims for restitution have asked
the courts to give them cash as compensa-
tion instead of farms. 7

Who’s the boss?

S P E C I A L R E P O R T

T H E F U T U R E O F W A R

January 27th 2018

The new
battlegrounds

The path to advocacy

May 24th 2018
Hong Kong | London | New York

Speakers include:

GERALDINE ROMAN

WEI XIAOGANG
Co-chair
Beijing Queer Film 
Festival
(Hong Kong event)

TALK IS CHEAP—IT ’S TIME TO ACT. 

We are living in unpredictable times. Progress in countries 
traditionally leading LGBT equality and inclusion can no longer 
be taken for granted. 

Visit prideandprejudice .economist .com to ﬁ nd out more

@EconomistEvents
#EconPride

S P E C I A L R E P O R T

T H E F U T U R E O F W A R

The new battlegrounds

War is still a contest of wills, but technology and geopolitical
competition are changing its character, argues Matthew Symonds

IN THE PAST, predictions about future warfare have often put too much
emphasis on new technologies and doctrines. In the 19th century the
speedy victory of the Prussian army over France in 1870 convinced Euro-
pean general staﬀs that rapid mobilisation by rail, quick-ﬁring artillery
and a focus on attack would make wars short and decisive. Those ideas
were put to the test at the beginning of the ﬁrst world war. The four years
of trench warfare on the western front proved them wrong.
In the 1930s it was widely believed that aerial bombardment of cit-
ies would prove devastating enough to prompt almost immediate capitu-
lation. That forecast came true only with the invention of nuclear weap-
ons a decade later. When America demonstrated in the ﬁrst Gulf war in
1990-91 what a combination of its precision-guided munitions, new intel-
ligence, surveillance and reconnaissance methods, space-based commu-
nications and stealth technology could achieve, many people assumed
that in future the West would always be able to rely on swift, painless vic-
tories. But after the terrorist attacks on America on September 11th 2001,
wars took a diﬀerent course. 
This special report will therefore oﬀer its predictions with humility.
It will also limit them to the next 20 years or so, because beyond that the
uncertainties become overwhelming. And it will not speculate about the
clear and present danger of war breaking out over North Korea’s nuclear
weapons, which with luck can be contained. Instead, it will outline the
long-term trends in warfare that can be identiﬁed with some conﬁdence.
In the past half-century wars between states have become exceed-
ingly rare, and those between great powers and their allies almost non-
existent, mainly because of the mutually destructive power of nuclear
weapons, international legal constraints and the declining appetite for
violence of relatively prosperous societies. On the other hand, intrastate
or civil wars have been relatively numerous, especially in fragile or fail-
ing states, and have usually proved long-lasting. Climate change, popula-
tion growth and sectarian or ethnic extremism are likely to ensure that
such wars will continue. 

C O N T E N T S

5 Great-power conﬂict

Pr ide and prejudice

7 Information war

My truth against yours

8 Hybr id war fare

Shades of grey

9 Cities

House to house

10 Power projection

Stay well back

12 Threats to nuclear stability

Not so MAD

13 Militar y robotics

War at hyperspeed

15 Autonomous weapons

Man and machine

1

A list of sources is at

Economist.com/specialreports

3

A C K N O W L E D G M E N T S

As well as those mentioned in the
text, the author would like to
express special thanks to the
following people for their help in
prepar ing this special repor t:
Douglas Barr ie, Susanna Blume,
Justin Bronk, Gen Sir Nicholas
Car ter, Malcolm Chalmers, Emil Dall,
Rober t Einhorn, Sir Lawrence
Freedman, Andrew Glazzard, Mark
Gunzinger, Kathleen Hicks, Kar in von
Hippel, Andrew Krepinevich, James
Lewis, Lt Col Debi Lomax, Thomas
Mahnken, Raj Shah, James Sullivan,
Trevor Taylor and Andrew Tyler.

The Economist Januar y 27th 2018 

S P E C I A L R E P O R T

T H E F U T U R E O F W A R

The enemy within

Number of armed conf licts by type

Extrastate
Interstate
Intrastate

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

1946 50

55

60

65

70

75

80

85

90

95 2000 05

10

16

Source: UCDP

Increasingly, they will be fought in urban environments, if
only because by 2040 two-thirds of the world’s population will
be living in cities. The number of megacities with populations of
more than 10m has doubled to 29 in the past 20 years, and each
year nearly 80m people are moving from rural to urban areas. In-
tense urban warfare, as demonstrated by the recent battles for
Aleppo and Mosul, remains grinding and indiscriminate, and
will continue to present diﬃcult problems for well-meaning
Western intervention forces. Technology will change war in cities
as much as other types of warfare, but it will still have to be fought
at close quarters, block by block. 
Even though full-scale interstate warfare between great
powers remains improbable, there is still scope for less severe
forms of military competition. In particular, both Russia and Chi-
na now seem unwilling to accept the international dominance
of America that has been a fact of life in the 20 years since the end
of the cold war. Both have an interest in challenging the Ameri-
can-sponsored international order, and both have recently
shown that they are prepared to apply military force to defend
what they see as their legitimate interests: Russia by annexing
Crimea and destabilising Ukraine, and China by building mili-
tarised artiﬁcial islands and exerting force in disputes with re-
gional neighbours in the South and East China Seas. 
In the past decade, both China and Russia have spent
heavily on a wide range of military capabilities to counter Amer-
ica’s capacity to project power on behalf of threatened or bullied
allies. In military jargon, these capabilities are known as anti-ac-
cess/area denial or A2/AD. Their aim is not to go to war with
America but to make an American intervention more risky and
more costly. That has increasingly enabled Russia and China to
exploit a “grey zone” between war and peace. Grey-zone opera-
tions aim to reap either political or territorial gains normally as-
sociated with overt military aggression without tipping over the
threshold into open warfare with a powerful adversary. They are
all about calibration, leverage and ambiguity. The grey zone par-
ticularly lends itself to hybrid warfare, a term ﬁrst coined about
ten years ago. Deﬁnitions vary, but in essence it is a blurring of
military, economic, diplomatic, intelligence and criminal means
to achieve a political goal. 
The main reason why big powers will try to achieve their
political objectives short of outright war is still the nuclear threat,
but it does not follow that the “balance of terror” which charac-
terised the cold war will remain as stable as in the past. Russia
and America are modernising their nuclear forces at huge ex-
pense and China is enlarging its nuclear arsenal, so nuclear
weapons may be around until at least the end of the century.
Both Vladimir Putin and Donald Trump, in their very diﬀerent
ways, enjoy a bit of nuclear sabre-rattling. Existing nuclear-arms-

2

4

control agreements are fraying. The protocols and understand-
ings that helped avert Armageddon during the cold war have not
been renewed. 
Russia and China now fear that technological advances
could allow America to threaten their nuclear arsenals without
resorting to a nuclear ﬁrst strike. America has been working at a
concept known as Conventional Prompt Global Strike (CPGS) for
over a decade, though weapons have yet to be deployed. The
idea is to deliver a conventional warhead with a very high de-
gree of accuracy, at hypersonic speeds (at least ﬁve times faster
than the speed of sound), through even the most densely de-
fended air space. Possible missions include countering anti-satel-
lite weapons; targeting the command-and-control nodes of ene-
my A2/AD networks; attacking the nuclear facilities of a rogue
proliferator such as North Korea; and killing important terrorists.
Russia and China claim that CPGS could be highly destabilising if
used in conjunction with advanced missile defences. Mean-
while they are developing similar weapons of their own.
Other potential threats to nuclear stability are attacks on
nuclear command-and-control systems with the cyber- and anti-
satellite weapons that all sides are investing in, which could be
used to disable nuclear forces temporarily. Crucially, the identity
of the attacker may be ambiguous, leaving those under attack
uncertain how to respond. 

Rise of the killer robots

At least the world knows what it is like to live in the shadow
of nuclear weapons. There are much bigger question-marks over
how the rapid advances in artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) and deep
learning will aﬀect the way wars are fought, and perhaps even
the way people think of war. The big concern is that these tech-
nologies may create autonomous weapons systems that can
make choices about killing humans independently of those who
created or deployed them. An international “Campaign to Stop
Killer Robots” is seeking to ban lethal autonomous weapons be-
fore they even come into existence. A letter to that eﬀect, warning
against a coming arms race in autonomous weapons, was signed
in 2015 by over 1,000 AI experts including Stephen Hawking,
Elon Musk and Demis Hassabis. 
Such a ban seems unlikely to be introduced, but there is
room for debate about how humans should interact with ma-
chines capable of varying degrees of autonomy, whether in the
loop (with a human constantly monitoring the operation and re-
maining in charge of critical decisions), on the loop (with a hu-
man supervising machines that can intervene at any stage of the
mission) or out of the loop (with the machine carrying out the
mission without any human intervention once launched). West-
ern military establishments insist that to comply with the laws of
armed conﬂict, a human must always be at least on the loop. But
some countries may not be so scrupulous if fully autonomous
systems are seen to confer military advantages.
Such technologies are being developed around the globe,
most of them in the civil sector, so they are bound to proliferate.
In 2014 the Pentagon announced its “Third Oﬀset Strategy” to re-
gain its military edge by harnessing a range of technologies in-
cluding robotics, autonomous systems and big data, and to do so
faster and more eﬀectively than potential adversaries. But even
its most ardent advocates know that the West may never again
be able to rely on its superior military technology. Robert Work,
the deputy defence secretary who championed the third oﬀset,
argues that the West’s most enduring military advantage will be
the quality of the people produced by open societies. It would be
comforting to think that the human factor, which has always
been a vital component in past wars, will still count for some-
thing in the future. But there is uncertainty even about that. 7

The Economist Januar y 27th 2018

Great-power conﬂict

Pride and prejudice

The great powers seem to have little appetite for
full-scale war, but there is room for miscalculation

DESPITE THE EXTRAORDINARY decline in interstate wars
over the past 70 years, many foreign-policy experts believe
that the world is entering a new era in which they are becoming
all too possible again. But there is a big diﬀerence between re-
gional wars that might be triggered by the actions of a rogue state,
such as North Korea or Iran, and those between great powers,
which remain much less likely. Still, increased competition be-
tween America, Russia and China poses threats to the interna-
tional order and does have a military dimension.
This special report will concentrate on what could lead to a
future conﬂict between big powers rather than consider the
threat of a war on the Korean peninsula, which is ﬁrmly in the
present. A war to stop Iran acquiring nuclear weapons seems a
more speculative prospect for now, but could become more like-
ly a few years hence. Either would be terrible, but its destructive
capacity would pale in comparison with full-blown conﬂict be-
tween the West and Russia or China, even if that did not escalate
to a nuclear exchange. 
The main reason why great-power warfare has become
somewhat more plausible than at any time since the height of
the cold war is that both Russia and China are dissatisﬁed pow-
ers determined to change the terms of a Western-devised, Amer-
ican-policed international order which they believe does not
serve their legitimate interests. In the past decade both have in-
vested heavily in modernising their armed forces in ways that ex-
ploit Western political and technical vulnerabilities and thwart
America’s ability to project power in what they see as their
spheres of inﬂuence. Both have shown themselves prepared to
impose their will on neighbours by force. Both countries’ leaders
are giving voice to popular yearning for renewed national power
and international respect, and both are reaping the domestic po-

S P E C I A L R E P O R T

T H E F U T U R E O F W A R

Just rattling our sabres

litical beneﬁts. Where they diﬀer is that Russia, demographically
and economically, is a declining power with an opportunistic
leadership, whereas China is clearly a rising one that has time on
its side and sees itself as at least the equal of America, if not even-
tually its superior. 
Russia’s president, Vladimir Putin, wants to regain at least
some of the prestige and clout his country lost after the collapse
of the Soviet Union, an event he has described as the “greatest
geopolitical tragedy of the [20th] century”. He believes that in the
1990s the West rejected making Russia an equal partner, and that
the European Union’s and NATO’s eastward expansion jeopar-
dised Russia’s external and internal security. In a statement on
national-security strategy at the end of 2015 the Russian govern-
ment designated NATO as the greatest threat it faced. It believes
that the West actively tries to bring about “colour revolutions” of
the sort seen in Ukraine, both in Russia’s “near abroad” and in
Russia itself.
Russia’s armed forces, although no
match for America’s, are undergoing sub-
stantial modernisation, carry out fre-
quent large-scale exercises and are capa-
ble of conducting high-intensity warfare
at short notice across a narrow front
against NATO forces. Russian military air-
craft often probe European air defences
and buzz NATO warships in the Baltic and
the Black Sea, risking an incident that
could rapidly get out of control. 
War games carried out by the RAND
Corporation, a think-tank, in 2015 con-
cluded that in the face of a Russian attack
“as currently postured, NATO cannot suc-
cessfully defend the territory of its most
exposed members”. NATO has since
slightly beefed up its presence in the Bal-
tic states and Poland, but probably not
enough to change the RAND report’s con-
clusion that it would take Russian forces
60 hours at most to ﬁght their way to the
capital of Latvia or Estonia. 

Airbase/naval port
Russian
US/NATO
Baltic/Polish

Russian proxy
operating locations 
NATO members 

KAZAKHSTAN

UZBBEKISTAN
B

TURUUURKMENISTAN

IRAN

1

5

 Russia’s anti-access/area denial capabilities

 Surveillance radar
3,000 km

FINLAND

ESTONIA

AT L AN T I C
O C EAN

NORWAY

SWEDEN

Baltic
Sea

Su-35 f ighter
radius
1,600 km
Aegis missile
ss ele
s le
ssilss
defence systemy myystem

BRITAIN

LAT VIA

LITH.

NETHERLANDS
GERMANY

POLAND

MILITARY DISTRICT:
W E S T E R N
Range, km
Iskander-M
ballistic missile 500
Anti-aircraft missile 400
Sur face-to-air
missile system
Illustrative deployment
location

KALININGRAD (Russia)

BELARUS

Moscow

Iskander-M
br igade
base

U K R A I N E

R U S S I A

C E N T R A L

BELGIUM
FRANCE

HUNGARY
ROMANIA

CRIMEA

S O U T H E R N

ITALY

BULGARIA

Black Sea

GEORGIA

SPAIN

Source: CSBA

Mediterranean Sea

GREECE

TURK E Y

SYRIA

IRAQ

The Economist Januar y 27th 2018 

S P E C I A L R E P O R T

T H E F U T U R E O F W A R

Airbase/naval port
Chinese
US
Regional
Potential US ally/
par tner

China’s anti-access/area denial capabilities

RUSSIA

N O R T H E R N

Beijing

Sur face-to-air
missile system
Illustrative
deployment location

CENTRAL

NORTH KOREA
Range, km
Anti-aircraft missile 400
SOUTH
KOREA

JAPAN

MILITARY
DISTRICT:
W E S T E R N

C H I N A

EASTERN

S O U T H E R N

Cruise missile system
Illustrative deployment
location
Anti-ship
cruise missile 400

M Y A N M A R

LAOS

East
China
Sea

Taiwan
Strait

Okinawa

TAIWAN

First island chain 

Su-30MKK
f ighter radius
1,350 km

Second island chain 

P A C I F I C O C E A N

DF-26 anti-ship
ballistic missile
3,000- 4,000

DF-21D anti-ship
ballistic missile
1,500

than currently recognised.” 
Mr Allison’s prognosis, based on an
analysis of past conﬂicts between incum-
bent powers and thrusting newcomers,
may be too deterministic. Although Chi-
na and America do not have anything like
the shared international agenda that
America had with Britain when the roles
were reversed, they are bound together by
a web of economic interests. Strategic pa-
tience and taking the long view comes
naturally to Chinese leaders, and succes-
sive American presidents (except perhaps
the current one) have tried hard to show
that far from wanting to keep China in its
box, they wish to see it playing a full and
responsible part in the international sys-
tem. The previous contests for hegemony
cited by Mr Allison were not conducted
under the shadow of nuclear weapons,
which for all their risks remain the ulti-
mate disincentive for great powers to
wage war against each other. 
Moreover, says Jonathan Eyal of
RUSI, a defence think-tank, demographic factors and changing
social attitudes in China suggest that there would be little popu-
lar appetite for conﬂict with America, despite the sometimes na-
tionalistic posturing of state media. Like other developed coun-
tries, the country has very low birth rates, fast-decreasing levels
of violence and large middle classes who deﬁne success by tap-
ping the latest smartphone or putting down a deposit on a new
car. In a culture of coddling children prompted by the one-child
policy, Chinese parents would probably be extremely reluctant
to send their precious “snowﬂakes” oﬀ to war.

Guam
(US)

No coﬃns, please

Even in Russia, where Mr Putin has encouraged a revival of
a more macho culture, he wants to avoid casualties as far as pos-
sible. In his view, the thousands of coﬃns returning from Af-
ghanistan in the 1980s were partly to blame for the collapse of the
Soviet Union, so he has gone to extraordinary lengths both to
minimise and conceal the deaths of any conscripted troops in
Ukraine. In Syria, he has used private military contractors wher-
ever possible. 
The risk that the West will run into a major conﬂict with
China is lower than with Russia, but it is not negligible and may

1

DF-5B

13,000

DF-31A

11,200

DF-31
DF-4

7,200
5,400

Chinese missile capabilities

Range of selected missiles, 2017

Minimum estimate, km

Number of missiles

101+
21-100
0-20

DF-15B

DF-16

DF-11

DF-26

DF-21C

DF-21D

C J-10

0

500

1,000

1,500

2,000

2,500

3,000

Distance from Chinese mainland to:

Taipei

Okinawa
Sasebo
Misawa
Yokosuka

Malacca
Strait

Guam

Sources: US Department of Defence; United States-China Economic and Security Review Commission; MIIS; IISS

The Economist Januar y 27th 2018

THAILAND

Paracel
Islands

Ph i l i p p in e
S e a

CAMBODIA

VIETNAM

S o u t h C h i n a
S e a

PH I L I P P IN E S

H-6K bomber
radius 3,500 km

Source: CSBA

If that were to happen, NATO’s political leaders would have
to choose between three bad options: launch a bloody counter-
oﬀensive fraught with the risk of escalation; exacerbate the con-
ﬂict itself by threatening targets in Russia; or concede defeat, with
disastrous consequences for the alliance. Domestic support for
the ﬁrst and second options would be fragile (in Britain and Ger-
many a Pew survey last year found only minority backing for
NATO’s Article 5 commitment to mutual defence if Russia were
to attack a neighbouring alliance member, see chart). And Mr Pu-
tin’s doctrine of “escalate to de-escalate” would almost certainly
bring the threat, and possibly even the use, of Russian tactical nu-
clear weapons to encourage NATO to throw in the towel. Mr Pu-
tin reckons, probably correctly, that he has a much higher toler-
ance for risk than his Western counterparts. 
The probability of such a direct test of NATO members’ Arti-
cle 5 promise is low. But Mr Putin has shown in Georgia, Ukraine
and Syria that he is an opportunist prepared to roll the dice when
he is feeling desperate or lucky. A second-term Trump adminis-
tration, shorn of generals com-
mitted to NATO and with a
more populist
Republican
party in Congress, might well
tempt him, especially if low en-
ergy prices and a weak econ-
omy were creating mounting
problems at home.
Some suggest that Ameri-
ca and China are destined to go
to war, falling into the “Thu-
cydides trap” as encountered in
antiquity by Sparta and Ath-
ens. In essence, the established
power feels threatened by the
rising power, which in turn
feels resentful and frustrated.
Graham Allison, the author of
a popular book expounding
this thesis, believes that “war
between the US and China in
the decades ahead is not just
possible, but much more likely

“Our country should use military
force to defend a NATO ally if it
got into a ser ious military conflict

with Russia”, % responding yes

Up to a point

Source: Pew Research Centre

United States

Netherlands

Germany

25

50

75

0

na

France

Spain

Britain

2015

2017

Poland

Canada

2

6

S P E C I A L R E P O R T

T H E F U T U R E O F W A R

2

be growing. China resents the American naval presence in the
western Paciﬁc, and particularly the “freedom of navigation” op-
erations that the US Seventh Fleet conducts in the South China
Sea to demonstrate that America will not accept any Chinese
claims or actions in the region that threaten its core national in-
terests or those of its allies.
For its part, China is planning to develop its A2/AD capabili-
ties, especially long-range anti-ship missiles and a powerful
navy equipped with state-of-the-art surface vessels and a large
submarine force. The idea is ﬁrst to push the US Navy beyond the
“ﬁrst island chain” and ultimately make it too dangerous for it to
operate within the “second island chain” (see map, previous
page). Neither move is imminent, but China has already made a
lot of progress. If there were a new crisis over Taiwan, America
would no longer send an aircraft-carrier battle group through the

Taiwan Strait to show its resolve, as it did in 1996. 
How such tensions will play out depends partly on Ameri-
ca’s allies. If Japan’s recently re-elected prime minister, Shinzo
Abe, succeeds in his ambition to change the country’s paciﬁst
constitution, the Japanese navy is likely to increase its capabili-
ties and more explicitly train to ﬁght alongside its American
counterpart. At the same time other, weaker allies such as Viet-
nam, the Philippines, Malaysia and Indonesia may conclude
that bowing to Chinese military and economic power is a safer
bet than hoping for a declining America to ﬁght their corner. 
The greatest danger lies in miscalculation through a failure
to understand an adversary’s intentions, leading to an un-
planned escalation that runs out of control. Competition in the
“grey zone” between peace and war requires constant calibra-
tion that could all too easily be lost in the heat of the moment. 7

My truth against yours

The power of fake news and undue inﬂuence

THERE IS NOTHING new about either fake
news or Russian disinformation campaigns.
Back in 1983, at the height of the cold war, an
extraordinary story appeared in a little-
known pro-Soviet newspaper called the
Patr iot. It claimed to have evidence that the
Pentagon had deliberately created AIDS as a
biological weapon and was ready to expor t
the virus to other countr ies, mainly in the
developing world, as a way of gaining control
over them. Within a few years the story had
reappeared in mainstream publications in
more than 50 countr ies.
In February last year, in the wake of
revelations about Russia’s inter ference in
Amer ica’s presidential election but before
the full extent of its activities on Facebook,
Twitter and Google had become known, the
Russian defence minister, Sergei Shoigu,
announced that he had created units within
the army to wage an information war: “Es-
sentially the information conﬂict is a compo-
nent of general conﬂict. Der iving from that,
Russia has made an eﬀor t to form structures
that are engaged in this matter.” He added
that these were far more eﬀective than
anything Russia had used before for “coun-
ter-propaganda” purposes. A week earlier,
General Petr Pavel, the Czech head of NATO’s
military committee, had revealed that a false
repor t of a rape by German soldiers in Lithu-
ania had been concocted by Russia. 
The internet and social media are
creating entirely new oppor tunities for
inﬂuence operations (IO) and the mass
manipulation of opinion. Those technologies
allow IO accurately to target those people
likely to be most susceptible to their mes-
sage, taking advantage of the “echo-cham-
ber” eﬀect of platforms such as Facebook,
where users see only news and opinions that

But which one?

conﬁrm their prejudices. 
Facebook now estimates that dur ing
and af ter the Amer ican election in 2016 a
Russian-linked troll farm called the Internet
Research Agency was responsible for at least
120 fake pages and 80,000 posts that were
directly received by 29m Amer icans. Through
shar ing and liking, the number multiplied to
nearly 150m, about two-thirds of the poten-
tial electorate. The ads aimed to exploit
Amer ica’s culture wars. Similar IO have been
launched in Europe, where Russia attempts to
bolster suppor t for populist movements that
oppose liberal social norms. 
It is not just Russia that conducts IO
against other countr ies. Jihadist extremists
and hacker groups employed by rogue states
or cr iminal networks pose similar if lesser
threats. And although the big social-media
companies now claim to be working on sol-
utions, including better and quicker attr ibu-
tion of messages, Russian IO techniques are

bound to adapt accordingly. Rand Waltzman,
a former programme manager at Amer ica’s
Defence Advanced Research Projects Agency
(DARPA) and now at the RAND Corporation,
explains that “when target forces star t to
counter these [Russian] eﬀor ts and/or
expose them on a large scale, the Russians
are likely to accelerate the improvement of
their techniques…in other words, an infor-
mation-war fare arms race is likely to ensue.”
In the future, “fake news” put together
with the aid of ar tiﬁcial intelligence will be so
realistic that even the best-resourced and
most professional news organisation will be
hard pressed to tell the diﬀerence between
the real and the made-up sor t. Oﬃcial web-
sites and social-media accounts will become
increasingly vulnerable to hackers, who may
be able not only to provoke stockmarket
crashes and r iots but even contr ive cr ises
between countr ies that may induce them to
go to war with each other. 

The Economist Januar y 27th 2018 

7

S P E C I A L R E P O R T

T H E F U T U R E O F W A R

Hybr id war fare

Shades of grey 

The uses of constructive ambiguity

A KEY ELEMENT of Chinese strategy is to “know your ene-
my”. The generals who worked at the Academy of Military
Science in Beijing studied every aspect of America’s “revolution
in military aﬀairs” in the 1980s, driven by advances in micropro-
cessors, sensors and communications. They concluded that al-
though China was well placed to exploit the new technologies to
create its own version of “informationised” warfare, it would not
be in a position to challenge American military might directly
until the middle of the 21st century. To do so sooner would be sui-
cidal. H.R. McMaster, Donald Trump’s na-
tional security adviser, once observed:
“There are two ways to ﬁght the United
States: asymmetrically and stupid.” 
Accordingly, the Chinese generals
and their Russian counterparts, who had
been equally impressed by the precision-
strike capabilities that America demon-
strated in the ﬁrst Gulf war, sought ways to reap some of the polit-
ical and territorial gains of military victory without crossing the
threshold of overt warfare. They came up with the concept of a
“grey zone” in which powers such as Russia, China and Iran can
exercise aggression and coercion without exposing themselves
to the risks of escalation and severe retribution. Mark Galeotti of
the Institute of International Relations in Prague describes this

An unexpected bouquet for the little green men

8

approach as “guerrilla geopolitics”. 
A key aspect of grey-zone challenges is that they should be
suﬃciently ambiguous to leave targets unsure how to respond. If
they do too little, they will face a series of small but cumulatively
signiﬁcant defeats. If they do too much, they risk being held re-
sponsible for reckless escalation. As Hal Brands of the Philadel-
phia-based Foreign Policy Research Institute argues, grey-zone
tactics are “frequently shrouded in misinformation and decep-
tion, and are often conducted in ways that are meant to make
proper attribution of the responsible party diﬃcult to nail
down”. They are drawn from a comprehensive toolset that
ranges from cyber attacks to propaganda and subversion, eco-
nomic blackmail and sabotage, sponsorship of proxy forces and
creeping military expansionism. 
The clearest recent cases of grey-zone challenges are Rus-
sia’s intervention in Ukraine, China’s assertive behaviour in the
South and East China Seas and Iran’s use of proxy militias to es-
tablish an arc of inﬂuence from Iraq through Syria into Lebanon.
All three countries recognise and to some extent fear superior

A key aspect of grey-zone challenges is that they should
be suﬃciently ambiguous to leave targets unsure how
to respond

Western military power. But all of them also see vulnerabilities
that they can exploit.
A Russian grey-zone strategy is to undermine faith in West-
ern institutions and encourage populist movements by medd-
ling in elections and using bots and trolls on social media to fan
grievances and prejudice. The result, the Kremlin hopes, will sap
the West’s capacity to respond resolutely to acts that defy inter-
national norms. If Russian cyber attacks did help to get Donald
Trump elected, they have been astonishingly successful in their
broader aim, if not in the narrower one of relieving Ukraine-re-
lated sanctions.
There is no evidence of Chinese complicity in Russian-style
hacker attacks on the West, but oﬃcially sanctioned trolls send
out hundreds of millions of social-media posts every year attack-
ing Western values and pumping up nationalist sentiment. The
advent of Mr Trump serves Chinese aims too. His repudiation of
the Trans-Paciﬁc Partnership removed a challenge to China’s re-
gional economic hegemony, a key objective of its grey-zone strat-
egy. And the American president’s hostility to free trade and his
decision to withdraw from the Paris climate accord has allowed
Xi Jinping to cast himself, improbably, as a defender of the inter-
national order. 
As for Iran, America’s inconsistency and lack of a long-term
strategy in the Middle East has oﬀered boundless opportunities
for grey-zone advantage-seeking. Both George W. Bush and Ba-
rack Obama in their diﬀerent ways allowed Iran to use a combi-
nation of soft religious and hard power through well-trained and
equipped Shia militias to turn ﬁrst Iraq and then most of Syria
into something resembling Iranian satrapies. 
Grey-zone success depends on patience and an ability to
blend together all the instruments of state power in ways that
pluralistic, democratic societies ﬁnd harder to achieve. Hybrid
warfare may be as old as warfare itself, but in Ukraine Russia pro-
vided a near-textbook example of it in its modern form, using a
variety of techniques: sophisticated propaganda that stirred up
local grievances and legitimised military action; cyber attacks on
power grids and disruption of gas supplies; covert or deniable
operations, such as sending “little green men” (soldiers in un-

The Economist Januar y 27th 2018

1

S P E C I A L R E P O R T

T H E F U T U R E O F W A R

2

marked green army uniforms) into Crimea and providing weap-
ons and military support to separatist irregular forces; the threat
of “escalating to de-escalate”, even including limited use of nuc-
lear weapons. All this dissuaded the West from even contemplat-
ing a military response of any kind. Whenever the sale of defen-
sive weapons to Ukraine was mooted in Washington, Mr Putin
threatened to expand and intensify a war in which he claimed
not to be a participant.
Russia’s objective is not to “win” a war in Ukraine but to re-
verse the country’s attempt to move out of Russia’s orbit; to dis-

courage other countries, such as Belarus, from trying anything
similar; and to stoke nationalist and anti-Western sentiment at
home. The eﬀort has not been without cost. Sanctions have hurt.
Making Crimea a viable entity will take time and lots of money.
Most important of all, NATO has rediscovered some of its sense
of purpose. But neither Mr Putin nor any likely successor would
hesitate to apply the same hybrid-warfare techniques in the fu-
ture should the need arise. 
China’s grey-zone campaign to assert uncontested control
over the South China Sea and jurisdiction over disputed islands 

1

House to house

Much of the ﬁghting in future wars is likely to take place in cities

DEEP IN THE southern Negev deser t there is a
small town called Baladia, with a main
square, ﬁve mosques, cafés, a hospital,
multi-storey blocks of ﬂats, a kasbah and a
cemetery. Oddly, it also has a number of
well-constructed tunnels. The only people
milling around in its streets are Israeli De-
fence Force (IDF) soldiers. Baladia, the Arab
word for city, is par t of the Tze’elim army
base. It has been built to provide a realistic
training ground for the next time the IDF is
required to go into Gaza to destroy Hamas
missile launchers. 
Baladia is used not just by the IDF but
by soldiers from other par ts of the world too,
including United Nations peacekeepers. Their
interest reﬂects a growing, albeit reluctant,
acceptance among Western armies that
future ﬁghts are most likely to take place in
cities. Megacities with populations of more
than 10m are spr inging up across Afr ica and
Asia. They are of ten r inged by closely packed
slums controlled by neighbourhood gangs.
Poor governance, high unemployment and
cr iminality make them fer tile terr itory for
violent extremism. 
It is hardly surpr ising that non-state
adversar ies of the West and its allies should
seek asymmetr ic advantage by taking the
ﬁght into cities. Air power and precision-
guided munitions lose some of their eﬀec-
tiveness in urban war fare because their
targets can hide easily and have no scruples
about using a densely packed civilian pop-
ulation as a shield.
Valuable lessons have been learned
from the battle for Sadr City, a large suburb of
Baghdad, in 2008, Israel going into Gaza in
2014 and the defeat of Islamic State (IS) in
Mosul last year. Even with close air suppor t,
aer ial surveillance and precision weapons
supplied by Western allies, Iraqi secur ity
forces in Mosul (not to mention a civilian
population held hostage by IS) took a terr ible
batter ing to defeat just a few thousand
well-prepared insurgents. As General Mark

Dr y run in Baladia

Milley, the head of the US Army, puts it, “it
took the infantry and the armour and the
special operations commandos to go into
that city, house by house, block by block,
room by room…and it’s taken quite a while to
do it, and at high cost.” He thinks that his
force should now focus less on ﬁghting in
traditional environments such as woodland
and deser t and more on urban war fare. 
To that end, he advocates smaller but
well-armoured tanks that can negotiate city
streets, and helicopters with a narrower rotor
span that can ﬂy between buildings. At the
organisational level, that means operating
with smaller, more compar tmentalised
ﬁghting units with far more devolved deci-
sion-making powers.
General Milley and other military
professionals are well aware that many of the
emerging technologies will also be available
to their adversar ies. Today’s smar tphones
provide encrypted communications that can
befuddle Western forces’ intelligence, sur-

veillance and reconnaissance platforms.
Quadcopter drones that can be bought from
Amazon can send back live video of enemy
positions. Commercially available unmanned
ground vehicles can put improvised explosive
devices in place. 
Yet Western military forces should still
enjoy a signiﬁcant technological edge. They
will have a huge range of kit, including tiny
bird- or insect-like unmanned aer ial vehicles
that can hover outside buildings or ﬁnd their
way in. Unmanned ground vehicles can
reduce the r isk of resupplying troops in
contested areas and provide medical evacua-
tion for injured soldiers, and some of them
will carry weapons. Worn-out or broken par ts
can be replaced near the front line thanks to
3D pr inting. A new generation of military
vehicles will beneﬁt from advances in solar
energy and battery storage. 
A key requirement will be for both
direct and indirect ﬁre to be highly dis-
cr iminating. As General Milley says, “we can’t
go in there and just slaughter people.” Par t
of the solution will be surveillance drones,
along with more accurate small munitions.
The Pentagon’s DARPA research agency has
come up with a “smar t bullet” which cannot
be dodged.
Commanders will also rely on ar tiﬁcial
intelligence to analyse the vast amounts of
data at their disposal almost instantly. Ben
Barry of the International Institute for
Strategic Studies says that big-data analytics
will be able to provide a picture of the mood,
morale and concerns of both combatants and
civilians, which he thinks is at least as impor-
tant as the military side. 
For all the advances that new technol-
ogies can oﬀer, General Milley says it is a
fantasy to think that wars can now be won
without blood and sacr iﬁce: “Af ter the shock
and awe comes the march and ﬁght…to
impose your political will on the enemy
requires you…to destroy that enemy up close
with ground forces.” 

The Economist Januar y 27th 2018 

9

S P E C I A L R E P O R T

T H E F U T U R E O F W A R

2

in the East China Sea has been going on for much longer, and has
turned a darker shade of grey over time as the country’s conﬁ-
dence and power has grown. Since 2009, when China submitted
a map to the United Nations showing a “nine-dash line” that sup-
ported its claim to “indisputable sovereignty” over 90% of the
South China Sea (see map), it has applied what James Holmes of
the US Naval War College has described as “small-stick diplo-
macy” (as opposed to the big stick of conventional naval power),
using its highly capable coastguard and militiamen embedded in
its ﬁshing ﬂeet to push other littoral states out of waters to which
it claims ancestral rights. 
It has been able to cow most of its neighbours into sulky ac-
quiescence while avoiding a direct confrontation with American
naval ships, which did not want to risk a major incident over
what China portrayed as maritime policing. When in 2013 China
took its provocations a step further by sending civil engineers to
the Spratly and Paracel archipelagoes to construct artiﬁcial is-
lands, Xi Jinping said China had no intention of militarising
them. But in 2017, satellite images released by the Centre for Stra-
tegic and International Studies showed shelters for missile bat-
teries and military radar installations being constructed on the
Fiery Cross, Mischief and Subi Reefs in the Spratly Islands. Fight-
er jets will be on their way next. Mr Holmes suggests that such
strategic gains cannot now be reversed short of open warfare,
which means they will almost certainly not be. Unlike tradition-
al warfare, grey-zone strategies will not produce decisive results
within a deﬁned time frame. But both China and Russia have
demonstrated that hybrid warfare, if not pushed too far, can
achieve lasting, if not costless, results. 
Hybrid warfare is hard to deter unless the target state itself
resorts to hybrid strategies. Mr Brands sees no reason why Amer-
ica and its allies cannot play that game too. America has potent
economic and ﬁnancial tools at its disposal, along with an arse-
nal of cyber weapons, expert special forces, a network of alli-
ances and unmatched soft power. But the West tends to think
about conﬂict in a binary way: you are either at war or at peace;
you win or you lose. Its adversaries are more attuned to conﬂict
somewhere between war and peace, and to blurring distinctions
between civil and military assets in pursuit of their goals. So for
opponents of the rules-based system, the grey zone will remain
fertile territory. 7

N

AN

500 km

C H I N A

M O N G O L I A

PH I L I P P IN E S

Paracel
Islands

V I E TNAM

h

AJIKISTAN

South  China
Sea

i
h
y

Spratly
Islands
TIBET
AUTONOMOUS
REGION
BRUNEI

NEPAL 

BHUTAN

Kyaukphyu
B a y o f
B e n g a l

MA LA Y S IA

Nine-dash line

Hong Kong

I N D I A
LADESH

Hanoi

MYANMAR

NORTH
KOREA

Beijing

SOUTH
KOREA
Yellow
Sasebo
 Sea
East
China
Sea

Shanghai

C H I N A

1,000 km

Tokyo
P A C I F I C
Yokosuka
O C E A N

JAPAN

First island chain 

Okinawa

Taipei
TAIWAN

Taiwan
Strait

Guam
Second island chain 
(to US)

Hainan

LAOS

VIETNAM

Paracel
Islands
Scarborough
THAILAND
Shoal
South
CAMBODIA
China
Sea
Spratly
Islands

Ph i l i p p in e
S e a

PHILIPPINES

BRUNEI

Hambantota
Malacca Strait
SINGAPORE
I N D I A N O C E A N

M A L A Y S I A

SINGAPORE

I

N

D

O

N

E

AUSTRALIA

A

S

I
EAST

Power projection

Stay well back

To counter regional challengers, Amer ica needs to
regain its technological edge

A CRITICAL REASON for the success of Russia’s and Chi-
na’s grey-zone strategies is that they have invested heavily
in long-range sensor and precision-strike networks as well as
cyber and space capabilities that can impose unacceptable costs
on America projecting power in their regions. While America
and its allies have spent much of the past 15 years ﬁghting wars
against irregular forces in the Middle East and Afghanistan, its ad-
versaries have been studying the vulnerabilities in the Western
way of warfare and exploiting technologies that have become
cheaper and more readily available. They have also beneﬁted
from research and development passing from military institu-
tions to the civil and commercial sectors.
Although at the strategic level American military power is
still uncontested, its major adversaries’ anti-access/area denial
(A2/AD) investment has blunted its technology edge to such an
extent that it can no longer count on local dominance in the early
stages of a conﬂict. This means that America’s adversaries are
able to shelter low-intensity and paramilitary operations by car-
rying out small-scale but highly accurate attacks against Ameri-
can forces should they attempt to intervene on behalf of an ally. 
It is doubtful that American commanders would recom-
mend such a hazardous mission unless they were given the go-
ahead to disable their opponents’ A2/AD network (revealingly,
the Chinese name for A2/AD is “counter-intervention”). That
would require a major commitment of forces to strike targets in-
side Russian or Chinese territory, such as ground-to-air missile
batteries and command, control, intelligence, surveillance and
reconnaissance (C2ISR) nodes, which would probably result in
heavy losses for the Americans. Even more important, such an
operation would carry a risk so large as to make it infeasible.
Even faced with the much less onerous task of suppressing Syri-
an air defences in 2012, Barack Obama was advised that 200-300
aircraft would be needed for an indeﬁnite period. 
Russia’s growing A2/AD capability has received less atten-
tion than China’s, but poses similar problems to America and its
allies. NATO commanders fear that in the event of a crisis, missile
systems in the Russian exclave of Kaliningrad and in western
Russia itself could make the Baltic Sea a no-go area for its naval
vessels. Similarly, albeit on a lesser scale, Iran can threaten ship-
ping in the Gulf, including American carriers, and American air
bases across the water. 

Salami tactics

China’s eﬀorts are aimed mainly at degrading America’s
sea- and land-based air power and thus limiting the kind of war it
can wage. The ﬁrst step is to achieve what the Chinese call “infor-
mation dominance”. That means targeting America’s data and
communications networks, especially in space. Physical attacks
on satellites, including “blinding” them with lasers, would be
combined with cyber attacks on computer systems.
To prevent America from operating close to China’s shore, a
bristling arsenal of land-based air-defence and anti-ship mis-
siles, along with fast missile boats, missile submarines and mar-
itime strike aircraft, would attack US Navy vessels, as well as at
US bases in Guam and Japan. In particular, China intends to push

1

10

The Economist Januar y 27th 2018

 
 
S P E C I A L R E P O R T

T H E F U T U R E O F W A R

China is
building a
strong
blue-water
navy with
aircraf t-
carr iers, to
which it is
now adding
heavily
armed
ar tiﬁcial
islands in
the South
China Sea 

many of the key enabling technologies,
such as artiﬁcial intelligence, deep mach-
ine learning, robotics and autonomy, has
accelerated. Another is that investment in
research and development is being driven
by the civil sector, which is looking for
quick commercial rewards. 
Russia, and particularly China, are
both making AI a national priority, and
have far fewer qualms than the West in
how they go about it. According to Jim
Lewis, an expert on the impact of technol-
ogy on warfare at CSIS, “when it comes to
government data, the US doesn’t match
what China collects on its citizens at all.
They have a big sandbox to play in and a
lot of toys and good people.” In China,
where big data are bigger than anywhere
else, privacy is not an issue, and there is no
division between commercial research
and military needs. By contrast, Google’s
London-based DeepMind subsidiary,
whose machine beat a grandmaster at the
game of Go, refuses to work with the
armed forces. 
This is not to say that the eﬀort to re-
store America’s technology edge will fail. It still spends nearly
three times as much on defence as China does, and indeed more
than all eight runners-up combined. Its forces have far more com-
bat experience than any of their counterparts, and it has
strengths in systems engineering that no other country can
match. It continues to dominate commercial AI funding and has
more ﬁrms working in the ﬁeld than any other country. 

More bang for the buck

But according to Bryan Clark of the Centre for Strategic and
Budgetary Assessments, America’s chosen method of making a
wide variety of investments and waiting to see what comes up
fails to bring the most promising technologies to bear directly on
the A2/AD challenge. In testimony to the Senate Armed Services
Committee on the future of warfare, Mr Clark argued that Ameri-
ca should apply new technologies to four main areas of warfare:
undersea, strike, air and electromagnetic.
Quiet Chinese submarines and new active sonar systems
are making it increasingly risky for American submarines to op-
erate in Chinese coastal waters. Small, hard-to-detect unmanned
undersea vehicles (UUVs) could be used to clear mines, hunt en-
emy submarines in shallow waters and gather intelligence. Larg-
er ones could deploy seabed payloads such as long-endurance
sensors, power packs for other UUVs and extra missiles for
manned submarines. 
In the air, America may try to degrade an adversary’s inte-
grated air-defence systems (IADs) by interfering with their sen-
sors and control systems, then send out networked swarms of
small unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) to inﬂict further damage
before deploying penetrating long-range stealth bombers such
as the B2 and the new B21. But air supremacy of the kind it has en-
joyed since the end of the cold war may be passing. To achieve
even local dominance, it will need longer-range sensors and la-
sers to detect enemy aircraft. Manned aircraft will increasingly
be platforms for sensors, data-gathering and stand-oﬀ missiles. 
Dominance of the electromagnetic spectrum will become
more and more important. New ways of achieving it will include
stealth technologies to conceal the radar signature of ships and
planes; protecting space-based communications networks from 

1

11

2

American carriers well beyond the unrefuelled range of their
strike aircraft, such as the new F-35 stealth ﬁghter, or risk cata-
strophic damage from anti-ship ballistic missiles.
The DF-21D, known as the “carrier killer”, is a ballistic mis-
sile that can travel by road. It has a range of over 1,000 miles and
may carry manoeuvrable conventional warheads. It might or
might not work as planned, but there is enough uncertainty to
make it a powerful deterrent. At the same time China is building
a strong blue-water navy with aircraft-carriers of its own, to
which it is now adding heavily armed artiﬁcial islands in the
South China Sea. 
In response, the Pentagon in 2014 announced its “Third Oﬀ-
set Strategy”, concluding that if it could deter and defeat the “pac-
ing threat” from China, it would be able to advance America’s in-
terests and defend its allies not only in the Asia-Paciﬁc region but
anywhere in the world. The strategy focuses on areas such as au-
tonomous learning systems, human-machine collaborative de-
cision-making, assisted human operations, advanced manned-
unmanned systems operations, networked autonomous weap-
ons and high-speed projectiles, all of which are certain to have a
major impact on the future of warfare.
The name could have been better chosen (and indeed, has
been quietly dropped by the Trump administration). The ﬁrst oﬀ-
set, in the 1950s, was America’s advantage in nuclear weapons as
a way of repelling the Soviet Union’s much larger conventional
forces if they were to attack Europe. The second, when the Sovi-
ets achieved nuclear parity, was the “look deep, strike deep” pre-
cision-guidance revolution of the 1980s, designed to achieve the
same result without using nuclear weapons. 
The third oﬀset, like the second, aims to harness emerging
technologies to restore America’s “overmatch” against near-peer
adversaries, and thus its ability to project power even in highly
contested environments. But whereas previous oﬀsets secured a
period of lasting technological advantage, even its most enthusi-
astic advocates (such as Bob Work, the deputy secretary of de-
fence until 2017, who drove the eﬀort for three years; or Michael
O’Hanlon, a defence expert at the Brookings Institution) concede
that this time America’s lead may be more ﬂeeting.
One reason for caution is that the pace of innovation in

The Economist Januar y 27th 2018 

S P E C I A L R E P O R T

T H E F U T U R E O F W A R

2

attack; launching decoys; and defences against incoming missile
salvoes. For example, miniaturised electromagnetic weapons
(EMW) mounted on swarms of expendable UAVs launched close
to shore from a large UUV could jam an opponent’s targeting sen-
sors and communications. Electromagnetic rail guns mounted
on ships, which can ﬁre projectiles at 4,500 miles an hour to the
edge of space, could counter ballistic-missile warheads. 
The Pentagon’s lumbering acquisition system will ﬁnd it
hard to accommodate any of this. To get even close to keeping up
with the pace of innovation, says Mr Work, it will have to move
to rapid prototyping and adopt a diﬀerent attitude to testing, em-
ulating Silicon Valley’s readiness to “fail fast”. It will also have to
ﬁnd less bureaucratic ways of doing business with ﬁrms devel-
oping key technologies. To that end, the Pentagon has estab-
lished DIUx (Defence Innovation Unit Experimental) to team up
with companies that would not previously have worked with it.
Finding the money will be another problem. And whereas
the second oﬀset was underwritten by the commitment of suc-
cessive administrations, the third oﬀset is no longer considered a
strategy, merely a helpful way to tackle wider defence modern-
isation. Above all, it needs a compelling operational concept,
tested in war games, that service chiefs feel able to support. The
Chinese and the Russians will be watching with interest. 7

Threats to nuclear stability

Not so MAD

Mutually assured destruction has ser ved as the
ultimate deterrent, but for how much longer?

NUCLEAR WEAPONS, LIKE the poor, seem likely always to
be with us. Even though arms-control agreements between
America and the Soviet Union, and then Russia, have drastically
reduced overall numbers, both countries are committed to costly
long-term modernisation programmes for their strategic nuclear
forces that should ensure their viability for the rest of the century.
Russia is about halfway through recapitalising its strategic
forces, which include a soon-to-be-deployed road-mobile inter-
continental ballistic missile (ICBM); a new heavy ICBM; eight
new ballistic-missile submarines (SSBNs), most of which will be
in service by 2020; upgraded heavy bombers; and a new stealth
bomber able to carry hypersonic cruise missiles. America will
replace every leg of its nuclear triad over the next 30 years, at an
estimated cost of $1.2trn. There will be 12 new SSBNs; a new pene-
trating strike bomber, the B21; a replacement for the Minuteman
III ICBMs; and a new long-range air-launched cruise missile. As
Tom Plant, a nuclear expert at RUSI, a think-tank, puts it: “For both
Russia and the US, nukes have retained their primacy. You only
have to look at how they are spending their money.”
Other states with nuclear weapons, such as China, Paki-
stan, India and, particularly, North Korea, are hard at work to im-
prove both the quality and the size of their nuclear forces. Iran’s
long-term intentions remain ambiguous, despite the deal in 2015
to constrain its nuclear programme. Nuclear weapons have lost
none of their allure or their unique ability to inspire dread.
Whether or not they are ever used in anger, they are very much
part of the future of warfare. 
So far, the best argument for nuclear weapons has been that
the fear of mutually assured destruction (MAD) has deterred
states that possess them from going to war with each other. MAD

rests on the principle of a secure second-strike capability, which
means that even if one side is subjected to the most wide-ranging
ﬁrst strike conceivable, it will still have more than enough nuc-
lear weapons left to destroy the aggressor. When warheads be-
came accurate enough to obliterate most of an adversary’s mis-
siles in their silos, America and Russia turned to submarines and
mobile launchers to keep MAD viable.

A more dangerous world

It still is, and is likely to remain so for some time. But disrup-
tive new technologies, worsening relations between Russia and
America and a less cautious Russian leadership than in the cold
war have raised fears that a new era of strategic instability may
be approaching. James Miller, who was under-secretary of de-
fence for policy at the Pentagon until 2014, thinks that the deploy-
ment of increasingly advanced cyber, space, missile-defence,
long-range conventional strike and autonomous systems “has
the potential to threaten both sides’ nuclear retaliatory strike ca-
pabilities, particularly their command-and-control apparatus-
es”, and that “the potential of a dispute leading to a crisis, of a cri-
sis leading to a war, and of a war escalating rapidly” is growing. 
In a new report, Mr Miller and Richard Fontaine, the presi-
dent of the Centre for a New American Security (CNAS), identify
cyber and counter-space (eg, satellite jammers, lasers and high-
power microwave-gun systems) attacks as possible triggers for
an unplanned conﬂict. Other new weapons may threaten either
side’s capability for nuclear retaliation, particularly their strate-
gic command-and-control centres. James Acton, a nuclear-policy
expert at the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, lists
three trends that could undermine stability in a future crisis: ad-
vanced technology that can threaten the survivability of nuclear
attacks; command-and-control systems that are used for both
nuclear and conventional weapons, leaving room for confusion;
and an increased risk of cyber attacks on such systems because
of digitisation. 
Both America and Russia rely heavily on digital networks
and space-based systems for command, control, communica-
tions, intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance (C3ISR) to
run almost every aspect of their respective military enterprises.
Cyber space and outer space therefore oﬀer attackers tempting
targets in the very early stages of a conﬂict. In the utmost secrecy,
both sides have invested heavily in oﬀensive cyber capabilities.
In 2013 the Defence Science Board advised the Pentagon that:
“The beneﬁts to an attacker using cyber exploits are potentially
spectacular. Should the United States ﬁnd itself in a full-scale
conﬂict with a peer adversary,
attacks would be expected to
include denial of service, data
corruption, supply-chain cor-
ruption, traitorous insiders, ki-
netic and related non-kinetic
attacks at all altitudes from un-
der water to space. US guns,
missiles and bombs may not
ﬁre, or may be directed against
our own troops. Resupply, in-
cluding food, water, ammuni-
tion and fuel, may not arrive
when or where needed. Mili-
tary commanders may rapidly
lose trust in the information
and ability to control US sys-
tems and forces.”
One problem with this is
that the space architecture on 

Number of nuclear warheads

Russia
United
States
France

Source: US Department of State

Stockpiles

Retired

Israel
North
Korea

215

140

130

Overkill

7,000

6,800

China

Britain

2,510

2,800

Pakistan

India

2017 estimate

300

270

80

10

1

12

The Economist Januar y 27th 2018

S P E C I A L R E P O R T

T H E F U T U R E O F W A R

gine, or a boost-glide vehicle that would be launched from a bal-
listic missile and then ﬂy towards its target like a paper dart. Glide
vehicles pull up after re-entering the atmosphere, using the cur-
vature of the Earth to delay detection by ballistic-missile de-
fences. Both types would be manoeuvrable, and would be accu-
rate to within a few metres of their target. However, they, too,
could carry nuclear warheads, again leaving the target uncertain
what kind of attack it was under. America ﬁrst tested a glide vehi-
cle in 2010, but seems in no rush to deploy them. Russia and Chi-
na have more recently tested hypersonic glide missiles. 
Current American missile-defence systems, such as Patriot,
THAAD (terminal high-altitude area defence) and Aegis, provide
quite eﬀective regional defence but are not designed to cope with
a salvo of ICBMs. The Ground-based Midcourse Defence system
in Alaska and California is supposed to provide some defence of
the homeland against a few missiles launched by a North Korea
or an Iran, but it was never designed to defeat a massive salvo at-
tack by a major adversary. 
However, substantial improvements are on their way. Mr
Elleman describes the SM-3 IIA interceptors, which could be de-
ployed as soon as next year on Aegis-class destroyers, as a “big
deal”. They are much faster than their predecessors, and Mr
Miller thinks that if hundreds of them were put on ships close to
America, they might support a late midcourse defence against
Russian ICBMs. 
More exotic missile defences are not far behind. Mr Elle-
man says that in about ﬁve years’ time it may be possible to put
solid-state lasers on large numbers of unmanned aerial vehicles
(UAVs) orbiting at very high altitude. Small missiles could also be
put on UAVs as boost-phase interceptors, ﬁring a minute or so
after launch. Interception at that stage is technically much easier
than later on because the target is much larger when all its stages
are still intact, and moving more slowly. 
Mr Elleman believes that for now the advantage is likely to
remain with the attacker rather than the defender, but like Mr
Miller he fears that emerging technologies could “undermine cri-
sis stability very rapidly”. Yet if arms-control agreements could
be reached at the height of the cold war, it should surely be pos-
sible for America, Russia and China to talk to each other now to
avoid persistent instability. 7

Military robotics

War at hyperspeed

Autonomous robots and swarms will change the
nature of war fare

PETER SINGER, AN expert on future warfare at the New
America think-tank, is in no doubt. “What we have is a se-
ries of technologies that change the game. They’re not science ﬁc-
tion. They raise new questions. What’s possible? What’s
proper?” Mr Singer is talking about artiﬁcial intelligence, mach-
ine learning, robotics and big-data analytics. Together they will
produce systems and weapons with varying degrees of autono-
my, from being able to work under human supervision to “think-
ing” for themselves. The most decisive factor on the battleﬁeld of
the future may be the quality of each side’s algorithms. Combat
may speed up so much that humans can no longer keep up. 
Frank Hoﬀman, a fellow of the National Defence Universi-
ty who coined the term “hybrid warfare”, believes that these 

1

13

A missile-test tr iumph for North Korea

2

which America depends for its nuclear command and control,
including missile early warning, is also used for conventional
warfare. That means a conventional attack might be mistaken for
a pre-emptive nuclear strike, which could lead to rapid escala-
tion. Another diﬃculty is that an aggressor may be tempted to go
after cyber and space assets in the hope of causing major damage
to a target’s defences without actually killing anybody. That
would raise doubts over whether nuclear retaliation could be
justiﬁed. A third worry is that because of the potential speed and
surprise of such attacks, some responses might be delegated to
autonomous systems that can react in milliseconds. Lastly, there
is the possibility of “false ﬂag” cyber operation by a rogue state or
non-state hacker group. 

Don’t worr y just yet

For now, the prospects of a successful disarming strike re-
main suﬃciently remote to leave the strategic balance intact. Mr
Miller argues that it would require a “fundamental transforma-
tion in the military-technological balance…enabled by the de-
velopment and integration of novel military capabilities” to up-
set the balance. 
Ominously, he thinks that such a fundamental transforma-
tion may now be on the horizon, in the shape of conventional
prompt global strike (CPGS) and new missile-defence systems.
Both China and Russia fear that new American long-range non-
nuclear strike capabilities could be used to deliver a disarming
attack on a substantial part of their strategic forces or decapitate
their nuclear command and control. Although they would still
launch their surviving nuclear missiles, improved missile-de-
fence systems would mop up most of the remainder before their
warheads could do any damage. 
Still, Michael Elleman, a missile expert at the International
Institute for Strategic Studies, reckons that for now those con-
cerns are overblown. As much as anything, he says, they are
talked up to restrain investment in the enabling technologies:
“They [the Russians and the Chinese] are saying to the US, the
trouble with you guys is that you never know when to stop.” 
CPGS would involve a hypersonic missile at least ﬁve times
faster than the speed of sound and a range of more than 1,000
miles. This could be achieved in several ways. One would be to
stick a conventional warhead on an ICBM or a submarine-
launched ballistic missile—a cheap solution but a dangerous one,
because defenders would not know whether they were under
conventional or nuclear attack, so they might overreact.
The alternatives would be a cruise missile powered by a
rocket-boosted scramjet (a supersonic combusting ramjet) en-

The Economist Januar y 27th 2018 

S P E C I A L R E P O R T

T H E F U T U R E O F W A R

2

new technologies have the potential not just to change the char-
acter of war but even possibly its supposedly immutable nature
as a contest of wills. For the ﬁrst time, the human factors that
have deﬁned success in war, “will, fear, decision-making and
even the human spark of genius, may be less evident,” he says. 
Weapons with a limited degree of autonomy are not new.
In 1943 Germany produced a torpedo with an acoustic homing
device that helped it ﬁnd its way to its target. Tomahawk cruise
missiles, once ﬁred, can adjust their course using a digital map of
Earth’s contours. Anti-missile systems are pre-programmed to
decide when to ﬁre and engage an incoming target because the
human brain cannot react fast enough. 
But the kinds of autonomy on the horizon are diﬀerent. A
report by the Pentagon’s Defence Science Board in 2016 said that
“to be autonomous, a system must have the capability to inde-
pendently compose and select among diﬀerent courses of action
to accomplish goals based on its knowledge and understanding
of the world, itself, and the situation.” What distinguishes auton-
omous systems from what may more accurately be described as
computerised automatic systems is that they work things out as
they go, making guesses about the best way to meet their targets
based on data input from sensors. In a paper for the Royal Insti-
tute of International Aﬀairs in London, Mary Cummings of Duke
University says that an autonomous system perceives the world
through its sensors and reconstructs it to give its computer
“brain” a model of the world which it can use to make decisions.
The key to eﬀective autonomous systems is “the ﬁdelity of the
world model and the timeliness of its updates”.
A distinction needs to be made between “narrow” AI,
which allows a machine to carry out a speciﬁc task much better
than a human could, and “general” AI, which has far broader ap-
plications. Narrow AI is already in wide use for civilian tasks
such as search and translation, spam ﬁlters, autonomous vehi-
cles, high-frequency stock trading and chess-playing computers.

Waiting for the singular ity

General AI may still be at least 20 years oﬀ. A general AI
machine should be able to carry out almost any intellectual task
that a human is capable of. It will have the ability to reason, plan,
solve problems, think abstractly and learn quickly from experi-
ence. The AlphaGo Zero machine which last year learned to play
Go, the ancient strategy board game, was hailed as a major step
towards creating the kind of general-purpose algorithms that
will power truly intelligent machines. By playing millions of
games against itself over 40 days it discovered strategies that hu-
mans had developed over
thousands of years, and added
some of its own that showed
creativity and intuition. 
Mankind is still a long
way from the “singularity”, the
term coined by Vernor Vinge, a
science-ﬁction writer, for the
moment when machines be-
come more intelligent
than
their creators. But
the pos-
sibility of killer robots can no
longer be dismissed. Stephen
Hawking, Elon Musk, Bill Gates
and many other experts believe
that, handled badly, general AI
could be an existential threat to
the human race.
In the meantime, military
applications of narrow AI are

Military
Industrial
Commercial
Personal

Worldwide spending on
robotics, by sector, $bn

All over the place

2000 05

10 15

20* 25*

Source: Siemens

60

50

*Forecast

70

40

30

20

10

0

14

Eﬀective—and expendable

already close to bringing about another revolution. Robert Work,
the architect of America’s third oﬀset strategy, stresses that this is
not all about autonomous drones, important though they will
increasingly become. His main focus has been on human-mach-
ine collaboration to help humans make better decisions much
faster, and “combat teaming”, using unmanned and manned sys-
tems together.
Autonomous systems will draw on machine deep learning
to operate “at the speed of light” where humans cannot respond
fast enough to events like cyber attacks, missiles ﬂying at hyper-
sonic speed or electronic warfare. AI will also become ever more
important in big-data analytics. Military analysts are currently
overwhelmed by the amount of data, especially video, being
generated by surveillance drones and the monitoring of social-
media posts by terrorist groups. Before leaving the Pentagon, Mr
Work set up an algorithmic-warfare team to consider how AI can
help hunt Islamic State ﬁghters in Syria and mobile missile
launchers in North Korea. Cyber warfare, in particular, is likely to
become a contest between algorithms as AI systems look for net-
work vulnerabilities to attack, and counter-autonomy software
learns from attacks to design the best response. 
In advanced human-machine combat teaming, UAVs will
ﬂy ahead of and alongside piloted aircraft such as the F-35. The
human pilot will give the UAV its general mission instructions
and deﬁne the goal, such as striking a particular target, but the
UAV will be able to determine how it meets that goal by selecting
from a predeﬁned set of actions, and will respond to any unex-
pected challenges or opportunities. Or unmanned ground vehi-
cles might work alongside special forces equipped with wear-
able electronics and exoskeletons to provide machine strength
and protection. As Mr Work puts it: “Ten years from now, if the
ﬁrst through a breach isn’t a fricking robot, shame on us.”
Autonomous “uninhabited” vehicles, whether in the air,
on the ground or under the sea, oﬀer many advantages over their
manned equivalents. Apart from saving money on staﬀ, they can
often be bolder and more persistent than humans because they
do not get tired, frightened, bored or angry. They are also likely to
be cheaper and smaller than manned versions because they do
not have to protect people from enemy attack, so they can be de-
ployed in greater numbers and in more dangerous situations. 

The Economist Januar y 27th 2018

1

S P E C I A L R E P O R T

T H E F U T U R E O F W A R

By contrast, low-cost, expendable distributed platforms can
be built in large numbers and controlled by relatively few hu-
mans. Swarms can make life very diﬃcult for adversaries. They
will come in many shapes and sizes, each designed to carry out a
particular mission, such as reconnaissance over a wide area, de-
fending ships or troops on the ground and so on. They will be
able to work out the best way to accomplish their mission as it
unfolds, and might also be networked together into a single
“swarmanoid”. Tiny 3D-printed drones, costing perhaps as little
as a dollar each, says Mr Scharre, could be formed into “smart
clouds” that might permeate a building or be air-dropped over a
wide area to look for hidden enemy forces.
It is certain that autonomous weapons systems will appear
on the battleﬁeld in the years ahead. What is less clear is whether
America will be the ﬁrst to deploy them. In July 2017 China pro-
duced its “Next-Generation Artiﬁcial-Intelligence Development
Plan”, which designates AI as the transformative technology un-
derpinning future economic and military power. It aims for China
to become the pre-eminent force in AI by 2030, using a strategy of
“military-civil fusion” that America would ﬁnd hard to replicate.
And in September Vladimir Putin told Russian children returning
to school that “artiﬁcial intelligence is the future, not only for Rus-
sia but for all of mankind…whoever becomes the leader in this
sphere will become the ruler of the world.” Elon Musk, of Tesla
and SpaceX fame, responded by tweeting that “competition for AI
superiority at national level [is the] most likely cause of WW3.”
Peter Singer is less apocalyptic than Mr Musk, but he agrees
that the competition for AI dominance is fuelling an arms race
that will itself generate insecurity. This arms race may be espe-
cially destabilising because the capabilities of robotic weapons
systems will not become clear until someone is tempted to use
them. The big question is whether this competition can be con-
tained, and whether rules to ensure human control over autono-
mous systems are possible—let alone enforceable. 7

Autonomous weapons

Man and machine

AI-empowered robots pose entirely new dangers,
possibly of an existential kind

MANY OF THE trends in warfare that this special report has
identiﬁed, although worrying, are at least within human
experience. Great-power competition may be making a come-
back. The attempt of revisionist powers to achieve their ends by
using hybrid warfare in the grey zone is taking new forms. But
there is nothing new about big countries bending smaller neigh-
bours to their will without invading them. The prospect of na-
scent technologies contributing to instability between nuclear-
armed adversaries is not reassuring, but past arms-control agree-
ments suggest possible ways of reducing the risk of escalation.
The fast-approaching revolution in military robotics is in a
diﬀerent league. It poses daunting ethical, legal, policy and prac-
tical problems, potentially creating dangers of an entirely new
and, some think, existential kind. Concern has been growing for
some time. Discussions about lethal autonomous weapons
(LAWs) have been held at the UN’s Convention on Certain Con-
ventional Weapons (CCW), which prohibits or restricts some
weapons deemed to cause unjustiﬁable suﬀering. A meeting of
the CCW in November brought together a group of government 

1

15

2

Increasingly autonomous drones will be able to perform a
range of tasks that will soon make them indispensable. UAVs will
carry out the whole range of reconnaissance or strike missions,
and stealth variants will become the tip of the spear for penetrat-
ing sophisticated air defences. Some will be designed to loiter at
altitude while waiting for a target to emerge. Israel already de-
ploys the Harop, an autonomous anti-radiation drone which can
ﬂy for up to six hours, attacking only when an enemy air-defence
radar lights up. Autonomous high-altitude UAVs will be used as
back-up data links in case satellites are destroyed, or as platforms
for anti-missile solid-state lasers. Larger UAVs will be deployed as
tankers and transport aircraft that can operate close to the action.
Underwater warfare will become ever more important in
the future because the sea oﬀers a degree of sanctuary from
which power can be projected within A2/AD zones. Unmanned
undersea vehicles (UUVs) will be able to carry out a wide range
of diﬃcult and dangerous missions, such as mine clearance or
mine-laying near an adversary’s coast; distributing and collect-
ing data from undersea anti-submarine sensor networks in con-
tested waters; patrolling with active sonar; resupplying missiles
to manned submarines; and even becoming missile platforms
themselves, at a small fraction of the cost of nuclear-powered at-
tack submarines. There are still technical diﬃculties to be over-
come, but progress is accelerating. 
Potentially the biggest change to the way wars are fought
will come from deploying lots of robots simultaneously. Paul
Scharre, an autonomous-weapons expert at CNAS who has pio-
neered the concept of “swarming”, argues that “collectively,
swarms of robotic systems have the potential for even more dra-
matic, disruptive change to military operations.” Swarms can
bring greater mass, co-ordination, intelligence and speed.

The many, not the few

As Mr Scharre points out, swarming will solve a big pro-
blem for America. The country currently depends on an ever-de-
creasing number of extremely capable but eye-wateringly ex-
pensive multi-mission platforms which, if lost at the outset of a
conﬂict, would be impossible to replace. A single F-35 aircraft can
cost well over $100m, an attack submarine $2.7bn and a Ford-
class carrier with all its aircraft approaching $20bn. 

The Economist Januar y 27th 2018 

S P E C I A L R E P O R T

T H E F U T U R E O F W A R

2 experts and NGOs from the Campaign to Stop Killer Robots,
which wants a legally binding international treaty banning
LAWs, just as cluster munitions, landmines and blinding lasers
have been banned in the past.
The trouble is that autonomous weapons range all the way
from missiles capable of selective targeting to learning machines
with the cognitive skills to decide whom, when and how to ﬁght.
Most people agree that when lethal force is used, humans should
be involved in initiating it. But determining what sort of human
control might be appropriate is trickier, and the technology is
moving so fast that it is leaving international diplomacy behind.
To complicate matters, the most dramatic advances in AI
and autonomous machines are being made by private ﬁrms
with commercial motives. Even if agreement on banning mili-
tary robots could be reached, the technology enabling autono-
mous weapons will be both pervasive and easily transferable.
Moreover, governments have a duty to keep their citizens
secure. Concluding that they can manage quite well without
chemical weapons or cluster bombs is one thing. Allowing po-
tential adversaries a monopoly on technologies that could en-
able them to launch a crushing attack because some campaign
groups have raised concerns is quite another.
As Peter Singer notes, the AI arms race is propelled by un-
stoppable forces: geopolitical competition, science pushing at
the frontiers of knowledge, and proﬁt-seeking technology busi-
nesses. So the question is whether and how some of its more dis-
turbing aspects can be constrained. At its simplest, most people
are appalled by the idea of thinking machines being allowed to
make their own choices about killing human beings. And al-
though the ultimate nightmare of a robot uprising in which ma-
chines take a genocidal dislike to the human race is still science
ﬁction, other fears have substance.

Nightmare scenar ios

Paul Scharre is concerned that autonomous systems might
malfunction, perhaps because of badly written code or because
of a cyber attack by an adversary. That could cause fratricidal at-
tacks on their own side’s human forces or escalation so rapid that
humans would not be able to respond. Testing autonomous
weapons for reliability is tricky. Thinking machines may do
things in ways that their human controllers never envisaged. 

Repr ints of this special repor t are available. 
A minimum order of f ive copies is required.
Please contact: Jill Kaletha at Foster 
Pr inting Tel: +1 866 879 9144  Ext: 168 
e-mail: jillk@fosterpr inting.com

Future special reports
Autonomous vehicles Februar y 24th
Technology Quarterly: Oceans March 3rd
The geopolitics of energy March 17th

Previous special repor ts and a list of 
for thcoming ones can be found online: 

economist.com/specialreports

Corporate offer

Corporate orders of 100 copies or more are 
available. We also of fer a customisation 
ser vice. Please contact us to discuss your 
requirements.
Tel: +44 (0)20 7576 8148
e-mail: r ights@economist.com
For more information on how to order special 
repor ts, repr ints or any copyr ight quer ies 
you may have, please contact:
The Rights and Syndication Depar tment
20 Cabot Square
London E14 4QW
Tel: +44 (0)20 7576 8148
Fax: +44 (0)20 7576 8492
e-mail:   r ights@economist.com
www.economist.com/r ights

Offer to readers  

Much of the discussion
about “teaming” with robotic
systems revolves around hu-
mans’ place in the “observe,
orient, decide, act” (OODA) deci-
sion-making loop. The operator
of a remotely piloted armed
Reaper drone is in the OODA
loop because he decides where
it goes and what it does when it
gets there. An on-the-loop sys-
tem, by contrast, will carry out
most of its mission without a
human operator, but a human
can intercede at any time, for ex-
ample by aborting the mission if
the target has changed. A fully
autonomous system, in which
the human operator merely
presses the start button, has re-
sponsibility
for
carrying
through every part of the mis-
sion, including target selection,
so it is oﬀ the loop. An on-the-
loop driver of an autonomous
car would let it do most of the
work but would be ready to re-
sume control should the need
arise. Yet if the car merely had its
destination chosen by the user
and travelled there without any
further intervention, the human
would be oﬀ the loop. 
For now, Western armed forces are determined to keep hu-
mans either in or on the loop. In 2012 the Pentagon issued a poli-
cy directive: “These [autonomous] systems shall be designed to
allow commanders and operators to exercise appropriate levels
of human judgment over the use of force. Persons who authorise
the use of, direct the use of, or operate, these systems must do so
with appropriate care and in accordance with the law of war, ap-
plicable treaties, weapons-systems safety rules and applicable
rules of engagement.” 
That remains the policy. But James
Miller, the former under-secretary of De-
fence for Policy at the Pentagon, says that
although America will try to keep a hu-
man in or on the loop, adversaries may
not. They might, for example, decide on
pre-delegated decision-making at hyper-
speed 
if
their command-and-control
nodes are attacked. Russia is believed to
operate a “dead hand” that will automati-
cally launch its nuclear missiles if its seis-
mic, light, radioactivity and pressure sen-
sors detect a nuclear attack. 
Mr Miller thinks that if autonomous
systems are operating in highly contested
space, the temptation to let the machine
take over will become overwhelming:
“Someone will cross the line of sensibility
and morality.” And when they do, others
will surely follow. Nothing is more certain
about the future of warfare than that tech-
nological possibilities will always shape
the struggle for advantage. 7

Most people
agree that
when lethal
force is used,
humans
should be
involved. But
what sor t of
human
control is
appropr iate? 

16

The Economist Januar y 27th 2018

Europe

Europe’s welfare states

Battle of the beneﬁts

S T O C K H O L M A N D W A R S AW

from 11.9% to 2.8%.
500Plus is popular, especially in places
like Siedlce. Many in Poland’s small towns
and villages felt that the previous govern-
ment, led by the liberal Civic Platform
party, looked down on them. Over the past
two decades, the economy grew rapidly
but inequality also rose, with poverty
more common in rural areas. This is partly
why provincial Poles voted for PiS. The
500Plus programme ﬁts PiS’s Catholic, pro-
family ideology. PiS’s voters are more likely
than liberal ones to have two or more chil-
dren—and a ﬁxed stipend buys more in ru-
ral areas than in pricey Warsaw.
At ﬁrst, liberal politicians called the pro-
gramme a budget-buster. Now, seeing how

Populists are winning votes by oﬀering more generous welfare. How can
mainstream parties respond?
IT IS not cold inside the Municipal Family
Support Centre, but Barbara Choinska
keeps her coat on, in the manner of people
to whom the world has been hostile. The
centre is the main social-services point in
Siedlce, a town 90km east of Warsaw. Ms
Choinska has ﬁve children, no husband
and no job. “She struggles to make sure the
children are dressed and do their home-
work,” explains Adam Kowalczyk, the cen-
tre’s director. “We send someone each
week to help her maintain basic standards,
so they don’t get taken away by the state.” 
One thing Ms Choinska no longer wor-
ries about is having money for food and
rent. In 2016 Poland’s new government, led
by the populist Law and Justice (PiS) party,
launched 
the “Family 500Plus” pro-
gramme, which pays a monthly stipend of
500 zlotys ($148) per child, starting with the
second. Indigent parents like Ms Choinska
qualify for their ﬁrst child, too, so she gets a
whopping 2,500 zlotys per month. In Po-
land, that is not far short of the median
after-tax household income—and beneﬁ-
ciaries have no obligation to work. 
The programme has transformed the
Polish welfare state. Mr Kowalczyk’s cen-
tre, which distributes the stipends, has
seen its annual budget grow from about
35m to 94m zlotys. The World Bank esti-
mates the programme has cut the rate of
extreme child poverty (deﬁned as less than
1,500 zlotys per month for a family of four)

Government social spending, as % of GDP

Mostly growing

Italy

The Economist Januar y 27th 2018 41

Also in this section
43 Italy’s eurosceptics
44 Ukraine and Russia
44 Finland’s popular president
46 Charlemagne: Torn over Tehran

For daily analysis and debate on Europe, visit
Economist.com/europe

popular it is, they embrace it. Jacek Rostow-
ski, who served as ﬁnance minister under
Civic Platform, says that it is aﬀordable: it
costs about 1.3% of GDP, while the World
Bank expects Poland’s economy to grow by
4% this year. Civic Platform now cam-
paigns on a promise to expand 500Plus to
cover all ﬁrst-born children too. 
Poland’s prime minister, Mateusz Mora-
wiecki, boasts that PiS has deﬁed conven-
tional wisdom, favouring the “regular guy”
over the “elite”. In fact, child stipends are
common in rich European countries such
as Sweden, Germany, the Netherlands,
France and Britain. Poland’s 500Plus is gen-
erous relative to average earnings, but the
country’s overall spending on social pro-
tection is still only about 20% of GDP, well
below the EU average of about 28%. 
Historically, welfare-state programmes
have been introduced by the centre-left
(such as Labour parties in the Nordic coun-
tries and Britain) or the centre-right (the
Gaullists in France, the Christian Demo-
crats in Germany and Italy). Often they
were introduced precisely in order to keep
extremists from winning power. Yet in Po-

1

Sweden

France

Germany

Br itain

Poland

95

2000

05

10

15 16

1

35

30

25

20

15

1980

85

90

Source: OECD

42 Europe

2 land, it is the populist right that has seized
the mantle of the party of welfare.
And not just in Poland. In Hungary the
nationalist Fidesz party of Viktor Orban,
the prime minister, has launched New
Deal-style public-works programmes. In
France Marine Le Pen’s National Front de-
fends the protections enjoyed by perma-
nent employees against the “neoliberal-
ism” of President Emmanuel Macron. In
the Netherlands Geert Wilders’s Freedom
Party lambasts the government over cuts
to health care. The right-wing Alternative
for Germany exploits anger over unequal
pensions in the country’s east and west.
Meanwhile centre-left parties that felt ob-
liged to cut welfare during the euro crisis—
the Dutch Labour Party, the French Social-
ists, Germany’s Social Democrats—have
been hammered in recent elections.
Since the 1990s the received wisdom in
Europe has been that the post-war welfare
state was past its peak. But voters often
want it to be more generous, not less. In
polls in 2014 and 2016, citizens in three-
quarters of the EU’s members named “so-
cial equality and solidarity” as their priori-
ties for society. Western Europeans un-
nerved by the global ﬁnancial crisis want
protection against an uncertain future.
Eastern Europeans with skimpy public ser-
vices want the kind of security that their
western neighbours seem to have. Where
centrist parties have stopped championing
the welfare state, populist parties are pick-
ing up the slack—and the votes. A poll in
January put PiS’s support at 44%. Its closest
rivals, Civic Platform and the Modern
party, were at 15% and 6%.

No farewell to welfare
Back in the 1980s, when unemployment in
some European countries rose to double-
digit levels, lavish welfare states were seen
as one of the culprits. Generous unem-
ployment beneﬁts and sick leave discour-
aged people from working, while public
spending crowded out private investment.
Laws inhibiting employers from laying oﬀ
workers also discouraged them from hir-

Boosting babies

Monthly child benef it, Januar y 2018, $ at PPP*
1 child
2 children
3 children
0
150
300
600
750

450

2

Germany

Br itain

Sweden

Poland† 

France

nil

nil

Sources: 
National governments;
OECD; The Economist

*Purchasing-power par ity at 2016 rate
†Payments star t with f irst child
if family is indigent/
a child is disabled

The Economist Januar y 27th 2018

policies often saw their unemployment
rates go up faster than those which strong-
ly protected existing jobs. Yet the crisis also
drove countries like Spain and Portugal,
which got bail-outs, to make their labour
laws more ﬂexible. Their jobless rates are
now falling faster than those of Italy, where
Matteo Renzi, the prime minister from 2014
to 2016, managed only modest labour re-
forms before being ejected.
That has left the focus on France. Mr
Macron’s great mission is to revive the
French economy by shifting its labour mar-
ket to a more Nordic model. His ﬁrst re-
forms have already been approved by the
National Assembly, but many in France are
sceptical. “Our system continues to be fo-
cused on getting a permanent job, so you
can access pensions and unemployment
insurance,” says Bruno Palier of Sci-
ences-Po, a French political science school.
“Flexicurity is very far from French views.”
Flexicurity’s critics have some strong
arguments. Some economists challenge
how much active labour-market policies
have contributed to Germany’s recovery.
The Hartz reforms accounted for only
about 1.5 percentage points of the four-
point drop in Germany’s unemployment
rate from 2005 to 2009, one study found; a
bigger factor was rising global demand for
German products, especially in China.
Another threat to welfare-state reforms
is immigration. In Germany, France, Swe-
den, Britain and the Netherlands the share
of foreign-born residents now ranges be-
tween 11% and 17%, comparable to those in
traditional immigrant countries like Amer-
ica. Countries with greater ethnic diversity
are usually believed to have stingier wel-
fare states. Since the migration crisis of
2015, ethnic resentment against Muslims
has become a leitmotif in debates about
welfare-state policies. In Sweden, the
Netherlands and Germany populist par-
ties engage in “welfare chauvinism”, rail-
ing against refugees for collecting beneﬁts
at higher rates than natives. 
Yet such resentments do not seem to
have aﬀected European support for the
welfare state. Indeed, France’s National
Front, Germany’s AfD, Poland’s PiS and
the like are all staunch supporters of social
beneﬁts. They use welfare-chauvinist ar-
guments to attack immigration, not the
welfare state. In a recent study of 85,000
people in regions around Europe, Bo Roth-
stein and Nicholas Charron, political sci-
entists at Gothenburg University, found
that ethnic diversity did not undermine
support for beneﬁts; poor governance did.
In countries where citizens trusted their
government, the presence of immigrants
made no diﬀerence—perhaps because citi-
zens had faith that the system would block
them from free-riding.
Since the start of his presidential cam-
paign in 2016, Mr Macron has insisted that
he will balance his drive for economic eﬃ-

1

Macron turns Nordic

ing permanent staﬀ. The response was a
wave of cutbacks, from Margaret Thatch-
er’s deregulation in Britain to Sweden,
where social spending fell from a peak of
34% in 1993 to 27% by the end of the decade.
But by the late 1990s a new approach
developed, spearheaded by Denmark and
the Netherlands. Their “ﬂexicurity” model
sought to combine social protection, pro-
vided by the state, with more freedom for
employers to hire, ﬁre and adjust contracts.
The state also expanded “active labour-
market policies”, such as training and job
matching, subsidised daycare to help
women work full-time, and required the
unemployed to seek work. 
Scandinavian countries, which were
used to providing social beneﬁts directly
through the government, moved quickly
to implement ﬂexicurity. However, Ger-
many and France, which relied more on
protecting workers’ jobs, found it harder. In
Germany unemployment stayed high un-
til Gerhard Schröder’s Social Democratic
government pushed through the Hartz re-
forms, beginning in 2003. These cut early
pensions and unemployment beneﬁts,
created lower-paid job categories (“mini-
jobs”), and required the unemployed to
take part in job-search programmes. But in
France ﬁtful stabs at liberalisation that be-
gan in the mid-1990s were defeated or wa-
tered down by the left. The country kept a
dual labour market, in which insiders have
permanent contracts and full beneﬁts and
are hard to sack, and outsiders on tempo-
rary contracts have nothing. Southern
European countries like Spain, Portugal, It-
aly and Greece have suﬀered from similar-
ly rigid labour markets.
In December 2007 the European Com-
mission adopted ﬂexicurity as a guiding
principle of its economic recommenda-
tions. The next year the global ﬁnancial cri-
sis struck, followed in 2010 by the euro cri-
sis. Countries that had adopted ﬂexicurity

The Economist Januar y 27th 2018 

2 ciency with better economic protection. If
he does not succeed, he could wind up as a
failed reformer like Mr Renzi, leaving the
terrain to ﬁgures like Ms Le Pen or the left’s
Jean-Luc Mélenchon. Their versions of
welfare-state reform promise to render the
labour market even more rigid, and to
spend money that France does not have. It
already spends 31.5% of GDP on social pro-
tection, the most in the OECD and nearly as
high as Sweden at its peak. An electoral vic-
tory by Italy’s Five Star Movement in
March could have a similar eﬀect.
As for Poland’s PiS, it shows scant con-
cern for the long-term aﬀordability of its
welfare policies. Even as Poles rapidly age,
PiS is cutting the retirement age from 67 to
65 for men and 60 for women. That will
further depress the ratio of workers to pen-
sioners in a country that already suﬀers
from mass emigration and a low fertility
rate. But however misguided, such moves
are popular. If liberal parties cannot devise
their own credible alternatives, populists
could end up winning and holding power
in more European countries by promising
welfare for all. 7

Italy

League of sceptics

M I L A N A N D V I C E N Z A

Despite the fears, no one really wants
Italy to leave the euro
THE man who has done more than any-
one to create an air of apprehension
around Italy’s coming election is a genial
fellow with a round face, a broad nose and
silvery hair combed forward in the style of
the ancient Romans. Five years ago, Clau-
dio Borghi, a former managing director of
Deutsche Bank in Italy, converted Matteo
Salvini, the head of the Northern League,
to the view that Italy should quit the euro.
“Salvini called me at half past one in the
morning,” he recalls. “But it didn’t matter
because I don’t sleep.” After two days of ex-
planation, Mr Salvini, soon to become
leader of the League, was convinced. The
following year, he and his new economic
adviser set oﬀ on a “Basta euro” (roughly,
“dump the euro”) tour. 
The concern in EU governments and
capital markets over the vote on March 4th
centres on the possibility that the League
will return to government, and the remot-
er, but still conceivable, prospect of Mr Sal-
vini becoming prime minister. His party
has only recently, and only barely, been
overtaken in the polls by its electoral ally,
Silvio Berlusconi’s Forza Italia. Their alli-
ance, which also includes a smaller far-
right group, the Brothers of Italy, appears to
be the only one with even a chance of win-

Europe 43

ning a parliamentary majority, and the
three leaders have agreed that, if they gain
one, the party with most votes should
name the prime minister (who would,
however, need to be endorsed by the presi-
dent, Sergio Mattarella).
The League, which campaigns for
tighter immigration controls and sits in the
European Parliament with other populist
parties such as France’s National Front and
Austria’s Freedom Party, might also gain
power as part of a broader coalition. Or it
might join the intermittently eurosceptical
Five Star Movement (M5S) in a partnership
that Mr Salvini has discounted publicly,
but which senior League oﬃcials are ready
to contemplate privately. That is the night-
mare scenario that terriﬁes Italy-watchers. 
Mr Borghi’s hostility to the euro is un-
dimmed. “We live in a country whose di-
rect competitor can shut down our banks if
we do not obey it,” he says. “Is that some-
thing a nation that is supposed to be free
can endure?”
The depth of the League’s commitment
to leaving the euro is less clear. On January
11th Mr Salvini said Italy would need to co-
ordinate its exit with that of “other coun-
tries in diﬃculty”, and that the next gov-
ernment should anyhow focus on negoti-
ating changes to the single currency. If
conceded, they would obviate the need for
leaving. That appears to kick Italy’s depar-
ture a long way down the road.
There are two reasons for the League’s
newly cautious approach, Mr Borghi says.
First, the defeat of Marine Le Pen in last
year’s French presidential election shat-
tered hopes of France and Italy leaving to-
gether. Mr Borghi is working on procedures
for a unilateral exit, but they would need to
include, for example, measures to prevent
a run on the banks. A second reason arose
from the need for broad popular support
for a decision, the League maintains, that
can only be taken by government (M5S’s

founder, Beppe Grillo, has advocated a
consultative referendum, but no such pro-
posal ﬁgures in its electoral programme, a
sign of growing diﬀerences that may lie be-
hind his decision this week to separate his
blog from that of his party). The latest poll,
last September, showed opinion for and
against the euro to be tied. 
But even in the League’s heartland,
grumbling about the single currency is one
thing; actually quitting it another. Vicenza
registered the highest turnout of any prov-
ince in the Veneto region in a League-spon-
sored consultative referendum on autono-
my last year. But its export-oriented ﬁrms
are proﬁting handsomely from the recov-
ery in Europe, and no one seems keen to
rock the boat. Sales to the rest of the EU
were up by 4% last year, says Luciano Ves-
covi, the local president of the bosses’ asso-
ciation, Conﬁndustria, who sees the euro
as indispensable. Germany may be Italy’s
main competitor, he accepts, but in and
around Vicenza it is also the main custom-
er. Much of the leather upholstery that
goes into German luxury cars is tanned at
Arzignano, west of the city.
Vicenza also hosts Europe’s biggest gold
and jewellery show, Vicenzaoro, which
closed on January 24th. Among manufac-
turers, attitudes to the single currency are
more jaundiced, says Roberto Ciambetti,
the Speaker of the regional assembly and a
senior League oﬃcial. The strength of the
euro curbs sales outside the EU and makes
exporters vulnerable to competition from
Turkey. But that, he says, is a reason for re-
visiting the rules surrounding the euro, no-
tably the 3% deﬁcit limit, not for getting out.
There is plenty to fret about in Italy’s
election. The parties are making wild
promises that, if implemented, would add
substantially to Italy’s already vast public
debts of more than 130% of GDP. But the
idea that the vote could lead to an exit from
the euro looks fanciful. 7

Which way will Salvini jump?

44 Europe

The Economist Januar y 27th 2018

K H A R K I V

U K R A I N E

L U H A N S K

Luhansk

S

A

B

D O N

R U S S I A

100 km

Kiev

UKRA IN E

DN I PRO P E TROV SK

Line of
Contact

Donetsk

Olenivka

D O N E T S K

ZA POR I ZH IA

S e a o f

A z o v

CRIMEA

Ukraine

Calling a bully a
bully

M O S C OW

Legislators bicker, diplomats gab and
conﬂict rolls on in eastern Ukraine
AFTER nearly four years of war in eastern
Ukraine, and more 
than 10,000
deaths, reports from international moni-
tors in the region sound like a grim broken
record. On January 19th: 340 explosions.
On January 20th: 240 explosions. On Janu-
ary 21st: 195 explosions and two middle-
aged civilians hit by riﬂe ﬁre while travel-
ling in a bus near a separatist checkpoint in
the town of Olenivka. “One had blood cov-
ering the left side of his face and was hold-
ing gauze to it and the other had gunshot
wounds in his neck and left cheek,” the
monitors from the Organisation for Securi-
ty and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE) re-
ported this week. One of the men ended
up in hospital; the other died at the site of
the attack. 
The Minsk agreements, a peace plan
signed in early 2015, are meant to prevent
such incidents. Yet an end to the conﬂict in
the Donbas region remains a distant
dream. Russia bears the brunt of the blame
for failing to rein in its separatist allies in
the area and secure a ceaseﬁre. But Ukraine
in turn has balked at taking some political
steps outlined in the deal, saying they are
impossible until security improves; many
in Kiev see the accords as a raw deal. West-
ern negotiators hope that keeping dialogue
with Russia open may yet bear fruit. A qui-
et day on the front on January 23rd shows
“peace is possible with political will,” says
America’s special representative to the
conﬂict, Kurt Volker. On January 26th Mr
Volker will meet his Russian counterpart,
Vladislav Surkov, in Dubai for the ﬁrst time
since the American government approved
plans last year to provide lethal defensive
weapons to Ukraine, a move that then-
President Barack Obama had long resisted. 
The meeting will also come on the

Finland’s president

Mr Congeniality

known as the True Finns) has failed to
capitalise on her party’s base. 
But luck also has something to do
with it. Finland recently emerged from a
recession, and is still riding high after the
country’s centennial celebrations—which
Mr Niinisto largely oversaw—in late 2017.
Finland also shares a 1,300km (800-mile)
border with Russia. Finns do not want a
maverick wrecking the carefully bal-
anced relationship with their scary
neighbour. On the world stage, Mr Nii-
nisto has portrayed himself as a mes-
senger between superpowers. Last year
alone he met Donald Trump, Xi Jinping
and Mr Putin. Mr Niinisto says that, as
president, the most important thing is to
act in a way that won’t “blow the world
to pieces”. He is surely right there.

Sauli Niinisto loves dogs, hates wild parsnips and won’t do anything rash
IN EUROPE’S frozen north, two presi-
dents are standing for re-election: Rus-
sia’s Vladimir Putin and Finland’s some-
what lesser-known Sauli Niinisto. Both
are likely to win with huge majorities.
Some 70% of Finns back Mr Niinisto,
polls say—a Putinesque level of support.
Mr Niinisto looks likely to glide to victory
in the ﬁrst round of voting on January
28th. In a world where outsiders and
populists are on the march, how does he
do it? Unlike Mr Putin, he has none of the
advantages of being an autocrat; Finland
is one of the world’s freest democracies.
True, the Finnish presidency is mainly
a symbolic role, focused on glad-handing
foreigners and with little power over
internal politics. Yet Mr Niinisto has a
reputation for competence at both. As the
Speaker of parliament, he won applause
by encouraging MPs to travel second-
class and book cheaper hotels. When he
was ﬁnance minister in the late 1990s he
slashed public debt from 60% to just over
40% of GDP, tickling the Finnish love of
frugality. He also oversaw the transition
to the euro.
Mr Niinisto is, besides, a skilled retail
politician. He shares details of his private
life in tabloids: his much younger wife, a
poet, is expecting a baby; his dog recently
became an internet star after trying to
steal the presidential Christmas ham. Mr
Niinisto once called a radio nature show,
identifying himself only as “Sauli from
Naantali”, to ask about invasive wild
parsnips. He roller-blades, too. His closest
competitor, Pekka Haavisto of the Green
Alliance, has struggled to climb above
10% in the polls. Laura Huhtasaari of the
populist-nationalist Finns Party (formerly

heels of a contentious new Ukrainian bill
aimed at redeﬁning national policy to-
wards the Donbas. President Petro Porosh-
enko, who pushed the bill, says it will
“pave the way for reintegration of the occu-
pied Ukrainian lands”. The legislation de-
clares Russia an “aggressor”, and calls the
separatist-controlled parts of Donetsk and
Luhansk “temporarily occupied territo-
ries”, like Crimea—thus making it crystal-
clear that Ukraine blames Russia, not local
elements, for the secession. It also shakes
up the local command and expands presi-
dential authority to conduct operations
there without imposing martial law. Critics
of Mr Poroshenko argue that the bill gives
him unnecessarily far-reaching powers,
and protestors clashed outside parliament
ahead of its passage. Analysts expect the

measure to have little eﬀect on the ground.
Instead, it looks more like domestic politi-
cal posturing by Mr Poroshenko, who faces
a tough re-election ﬁght in 2019.
Unsurprisingly, Russia reacted with in-
dignation. “You cannot call this anything
but preparation for a new war,” declared
Russia’s foreign ministry, warning that the
bill risked “a dangerous escalation in Uk-
raine with unpredictable consequences
for world peace and security”. Russian oﬃ-
cials say the bill undermines the peace
plan. “Kiev has gone from sabotaging the
Minsk agreements to burying them,” said
Konstantin Kosachyov, chairman of the
foreign-aﬀairs committee in the Russian
parliament’s upper house. Most would say
the Minsk agreements have long been on
life support, if they are not dead already. 7

46 Europe

The Economist Januar y 27th 2018

Charlemagne

Torn over Tehran

Splits over the Iran nuclear deal are testing the transatlantic bond

hive oﬀ nuclear proliferation from broader concerns. But that ar-
gument seems to be losing ground in Washington. 
Britain and, especially, France still hope to keep Mr Trump on
board (Germany, without a proper government since September,
is otherwise engaged). Diplomats say they have long leaned on
Iran to curb its ballistic-missile programme. In March France’s for-
eign minister will visit Tehran to try to talk the mullahs round; Mr
Macron himself has been invited to Iran. Mr Trump has also be-
stowed his ﬁrst state-visit invitation upon his French counterpart.
Mr Macron may visit just weeks before Mr Trump is due to make
his ﬁnal decision on the Iran sanctions, on May 12th.
Mr Trump has left the Europeans in an tight spot, obliged to
side with Russia, China and Iran against their old ally. His threats
to kill the Iran deal have already left it in a “zombie state”, accord-
ing to a new report published by Bourse & Bazaar, a website that
promotes trade with Iran. The side-deals Mr Tillerson is pushing
for undermine the Europeans’ strategy of predictability—and
there is no guarantee that they will satisfy Mr Trump (or the Iran
hawks in Congress). Beyond Iran, tensions simmer between the
EU’s instinct for engagement and an American approach that
veers between aggression and unpredictability. This makes for
some awkward conversations in a club that is not yet ready to
consider life without American protection. “Trump highlights the
strategic dilemma of the Europeans in a way that is very uncom-
fortable for them,” says Jan Techau, an analyst at the German
Marshall Fund in Berlin.
How should they proceed? Mr Trump’s administration is
clearly split on Iran. European eﬀorts to rescue the deal would
strengthen the hand of the square-jawed generals around Mr
Trump who do not wish to antagonise America’s allies or em-
bolden Iran’s hardliners. Yet Mr Trump has resisted pressure from
his advisers before, as with his decision to withdraw from the Par-
is climate deal. He may well do so again. 
Many argue that the Europeans therefore need contingency
plans. America’s biggest weapon is not reimposing its own sanc-
tions on Iran, but slapping punitive measures on European ﬁrms
and banks that do business there. Ellie Geranmayeh of the Euro-
pean Council on Foreign Relations, a think-tank, suggests that the
Europeans should work hard with Congress to seek exemptions
from such “secondary sanctions”; if that fails, she says they
should threaten countervailing sanctions on American invest-
ments in Europe. Others might well argue that a tit-for-tat trade
war will do no one any good.

Europe help thyself
The American security guarantee remains indispensable; the
primary task for policymakers on both sides of the Atlantic must
always be to lessen divisions, not to accelerate a divorce. The best
way to do that would be for Europe to spend more on its own de-
fence, undercutting those in Washington, Mr Trump included,
who see the EU as a free-rider. But Europe can practise some pru-
dent insurance, too, working to develop its own nascent security
co-operation, so long as that does not divert resources away from
NATO. Mr Trump is especially erratic, but Europeans cannot sim-
ply assume that his successor will restore business as usual. It is
only sensible for them to gird themselves for a world in which
their interests may align a bit less often with America’s, whoever
is in charge. Mr Trump, after all, won the presidency while hold-
ing its foreign-policy establishment in disdain. That lesson will
not be lost in America; and nor should it be in Europe. 7

P ITY the poor European who seeks consistency. On January
22nd Mike Pence, America’s vice-president, said that the Un-
ited States was on the verge of quitting the nuclear agreement
signed with Iran in 2015. At the same time Rex Tillerson, the secre-
tary of state, was in London expressing optimism that the deal
could be saved with a bit of tinkering. Foreign ministers from
across the European Union were in Brussels that day; the confu-
sion hovered above their conversation like an Amazon drone
bearing either chocolates or dynamite. 
Mr Trump’s carnivalesque approach to the presidency has
made life hard for America’s allies, but his ﬁrst year in oﬃce has
not brought forth anything like the full horrors that some predict-
ed. Congress has boxed him in on Russia, NATO does not yet tot-
ter and trade wars have failed to break out (although this week
brought worrying news). Even if many Europeans reject Mr
Trump as baﬄing and odious—just 25% in a recent Gallup survey
express approval of his presidency—the transatlantic bond re-
mains intact. 
But the threat to the Iran deal of 2015, now hanging by a thread,
could change all that. The Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action
(JCPOA), to give it its full title, is the EU’s signature foreign-policy
achievement (some might say there are few rivals). Three EU
members—Britain, France and Germany—are co-signatories,
along with America, Russia and China. The EU has a formal role
in overseeing its implementation. The deal eased a security
threat in the Middle East, reduced the likelihood of war between
America and Iran, and represented a triumph for the EU’s pre-
ferred diplomatic method: dogged, law-bound and multilateral.
The EU saw it as a springboard for commercial and cultural en-
gagement with Iran and, though this was never a formal part of
the agreement, a way to bring it in from the geopolitical cold.
Yet on January 12th Mr Trump threatened to reimpose sanc-
tions on Iran within 120 days, thus nullifying America’s participa-
tion in the deal, if Europe failed to ﬁx its “terrible ﬂaws”. Ameri-
can worries with the deal seem to cluster around three issues:
“sunset” clauses after which Iran can ramp up enrichment; Iran’s
ballistic-missile programme; and its mischief-making in Syria, Ye-
men, Lebanon and elsewhere. The Europeans, unusually united
in their defence of the deal, say that its purpose was precisely to

Br itain

The Economist Januar y 27th 2018 47

Also in this section
48 Northern Ireland’s shutdown
49 Bagehot: The Midlands engine

The politics of tax

Sacred cows no more

Long-standing opposition to tax rises is slowly softening
DENIS HEALEY had a bittersweet mes-
decades to come. Political minds on the
sage when he took to the stage at La-
right and left are turning to the question of
bour’s annual conference in 1973 with a
how to raise this kind of money.
pledge to increase taxes. There would be
Until recently, politicians could dodge
“howls of anguish” from the rich, the then
tough decisions on tax. From the 1950s to
shadow chancellor promised delegates in
the late 2000s, the economy in general and
Blackpool. But he added: “Before you
wages in particular grew much faster than
cheer too loudly, let me warn you that a lot
they are growing today. That made it easier
of you will pay extra taxes, too.” Pay they
to collect extra revenues. In the decade to
did. Two years later, Healey raised duties
2008, bankers’ juicy salaries and rising em-
on alcohol and tobacco and increased the
ployment meant that income-tax receipts
basic rate of income tax from 33% to 35%. It
rose by 60% in real terms, despite a soften-
was the last time a British chancellor
ing of the income-tax regime.
moved the basic rate upwards.
As a result, the public is unused to the
Today such rhetoric—and such a poli-
idea of structurally higher taxes. A hysteri-
cy—is alien. The tax burden as a share of
GDP has dropped some three points below
where it stood in Healey’s day. Income-tax
rates have fallen steadily, as tax-free allow-
ances have risen (see chart). The bracing,
revenue-raising budgets of the past have
given way to ones that trumpet tax cuts
and do their best to disguise measures that
might bring in more money.
Yet the long-term tax-cutting trend may
be over. If the quality of public services—in
particular, the National Health Service—is
to be maintained, Britain faces the grim
prospect of across-the-board tax increases.
Healey’s budget, one of the harshest in the
post-war period, raised tax equivalent to
1% of GDP. According to oﬃcial estimates,
putting the country’s ﬁnances on an even
keel requires permanent tax rises in the re-
gion of 2% of GDP each decade, for many

Br itain, income tax, years ending March 31st
Basic rate, %

They can’t take that away from me

Sources: Tolley’s
IncomeTax; IFS; BofE

*People aged 65 years and under.
1974-89, single people only

Personal allowance*, £’000, 2017 pr ices

12
9
6
3
0

1974

85

95

2005

35
30
25
20

1974

85

95

2005

18

18

For daily analysis and debate on Br itain, visit
Economist.com/br itain

cal political culture and round-the-clock
media coverage makes it hard for chancel-
lors to take unpopular decisions, says Ken-
neth Clarke, who did the job in 1993-97. “A
few years ago [an increase in taxes] would
not have been regarded as sensational,” he
says. “People knew perfectly well that
sometimes taxes went up and down.” In
2002 Gordon Brown increased national-
insurance contributions (NICs), promising
the extra money for health care. But such
boldness is rare. These days, governments
prefer to raise money by stealth. In the Hea-
ley budget of 1975, there were eight big tax
measures. In George Osborne’s budget in
2016 there were 86 crafty little ones, includ-
ing higher taxes on landﬁlls.
But the reality of Britain’s ﬁnancial
straits is forcing a rethink. The best esti-
mates say that the NHS needs another
£20bn ($28bn) per year by 2022, equivalent
to 1% of GDP. Other departments are also
squealing. This week the head of the army
issued ominous warnings about the need
for more cash. Voters will have to pay more
or receive even less—and after eight years
of cuts, they have no appetite for the latter. 
The two main parties are responding,
albeit cautiously. Labour
talks boldly
about raising revenues, including by re-
versing recent cuts to corporation tax. But
even its avowedly socialist leaders blanch
at increases to tax for anyone bar the rich.
They have ruled out increases to the basic
rate of income tax, VAT or NICs. Only those
earning over £80,000 a year—about the top
4%—would face higher taxes (a policy
which might not raise money at all, in part
because high earners are adept at manag-
ing their ﬁnances). Recently a shadow min-
ister raised the prospect of those in big
houses paying more council tax. He was
promptly forced to resign.
Among the Tories, there is a growing
clamour for more spending, if not yet for

1

48 Br itain

2 higher taxes. This week Boris Johnson, the
foreign secretary, took a break from his day
job to demand that the NHS receive an ex-
tra £100m per week. When it came to the
matter of how to pay for it, Mr Johnson fell
back on the idea of a “Brexit dividend”, an
optimistic notion given that Brexit is ex-
pected to cost the exchequer money.
But some in his party are thinking seri-
ously about how more revenue could be
squeezed out of voters. Last year the Tories’
election manifesto promised to make as-
set-rich pensioners pay more towards the
cost of their care in later life, by including
the value of their homes in assessments of
their means. The policy’s poor design
meant that it was rightly criticised as a “de-
mentia tax” on those unlucky enough to
run up large bills for social care; it was hast-
ily dropped. Yet many Tories remain open
to tapping the wealthy. “There is a critical
mass that tax on wealth will have to hap-
pen at some point, as the system is unsus-
tainable. It is something the prime minister
is cautiously interested in,” says Chris Wil-

kins, who was head of strategy in Down-
ing Street until last summer.
Others, such as Nicholas Boles, a for-
mer Tory minister, have suggested raising
NICs, arguing that the idea might win pub-
lic support if it were made clear that the
revenue went to the NHS. Various techno-
crats, including Nick Macpherson, a former
permanent secretary at the Treasury, have
given cautious backing to something akin
to a hypothecated tax for the NHS, an idea
normally unpopular with economists.
Tax reform is unlikely during this parlia-
ment. The legislative calendar is crowded
by Brexit and the government has only a
slim majority. Slowly, however, political
tectonic plates are moving. The prime min-
ister is under increasing attack for her ti-
midity. Polls show that half of voters think
taxes should rise, the highest proportion
since 2004. If the public want to maintain
current levels of public services, they must
pay. Eventually the government, and the
opposition, will have to take their lead
from Healey and admit it. 7

Northern Ireland’s shutdown

A little more conversation

B E L F A S T

suspension of the devolved government.
Since then the British government has
hosted rounds of fruitless talks between
the two parties, covering issues ranging
from the rights of speakers of the Irish lan-
guage to the investigation of alleged past

But probably no more action, as the province notches up a year in political limbo
THIS year will mark two decades since
the Good Friday Agreement brought an
end to years of sectarian conﬂict in North-
ern Ireland. But as the region’s politicians
gathered for talks on January 24th, a grim-
mer anniversary was on their minds. As of
this week the Stormont Assembly, set up
under the Good Friday deal, has been sus-
pended for a year, following an almighty
falling out between republican and union-
ist parties. The latest round of discussions
designed to get it back up and running does
not look promising.
Senior members of the clergy painted a
bleak picture in their new-year messages.
Ken Good, the Protestant bishop of Derry
and Raphoe, lamented that Northern Ire-
land “has felt more divided than for a gen-
eration.” Eamon Martin, the Catholic arch-
bishop of Armagh, said: “We seem to have
gone into a kind of vacuum at the moment,
with very little sense of direction.”
Last
January, Assembly proceedings
shuddered to a halt when the late Martin
McGuinness, Sinn Fein’s leader in the
north, resigned as deputy ﬁrst minister.
McGuinness cited the “shameful disre-
spect” shown to his fellow republicans by
the Democratic Unionist Party (DUP), Sinn
Fein’s partner in government. Under the
Assembly’s power-sharing rules, Sinn
Fein’s withdrawal caused an automatic

Sinn Fein’s leaders, in no hurr y

The Economist Januar y 27th 2018

abuses by the security services. The atmo-
sphere was summed up by Naomi Long,
the leader of the centrist Alliance Party,
when she declared: “There is zero trust.”
That is partly because the negotiations
have been punctuated by bouts of elector-
al combat. Elections to the suspended As-
sembly last March produced a surge in sup-
port for Sinn Fein. The general election in
June saw the DUP recover, increasing its
tally of MPs to ten. This proved crucial
when Theresa May fell short of a majority
and persuaded the DUP to prop up her gov-
ernment, in return for £1bn ($1.4bn) in new
funding for the province. Republicans be-
lieve that the British government’s depen-
dence on the DUP has undermined its role
as an impartial broker in the talks.
The other aggravating factor is Brexit.
Most republicans oppose it, since it would
weaken ties with the Republic of Ireland.
Most unionists support it, for exactly the
same reason.
The latest round of talks features two
new ﬁgures. Karen Bradley, whom Mrs
May appointed Northern Ireland secretary
earlier this month, was previously the cul-
ture secretary and has no previous experi-
ence of the province. Meanwhile Sinn Fein
will soon be led by Mary Lou McDonald,
who will take over from Gerry Adams. Re-
publicans hope that Ms McDonald, who
has no past connection to the Irish Repub-
lican Army (IRA), will attract a new gener-
ation of voters to the party.
That ambition, and the chances of suc-
cess for the talks, have been dented by the
antics of Barry McElduﬀ, a Sinn Fein MP.
On January 5th, the anniversary of a mas-
sacre in 1976 of ten Protestant civilians by
the IRA near the village of Kingsmill, Mr
McElduﬀ posted a video of himself larking
about in a supermarket with a loaf of
Kingsmill bread on his head. He was even-
tually forced to resign. Sinn Fein should
have no problem winning the forthcoming
by-election for his seat, but his behaviour
has made a mockery of republican com-
plaints about the DUP’s “disrespect” for its
opponents. The contest will be bitter.
What if the talks go nowhere? With the
Assembly suspended, Northern Ireland is
already being governed mainly from West-
minster. In the absence of a deal between
Sinn Fein and the DUP, the province could
revert to “direct rule” by the British. In prac-
tice that might not look very diﬀerent. But
the breakdown of a key part of the Good
Friday Agreement is a cause for deep con-
cern. The accord has formed the basis for
Northern Ireland’s prosperity and security.
During the 1990s around 550 people were
killed as a result of sectarian violence. In
the past decade, fewer than 30 have been.
Few believe that the end of devolution
could result in a return to previous levels of
violence. But the longer Northern Ireland’s
politicians play for time, the greater the
risks they take with the hard-won peace. 7

The Economist Januar y 27th 2018 

Br itain 49

Bagehot

The Midlands engine

Westminster may be brain-dead but some parts of Britain are buzzing with ideas

More recently, it has encouraged the idea that the country’s future
lies in ﬁnance and other services. In 1980 Warwick attracted an
academic-entrepreneur, Kumar Bhattacharyya, who thought this
was nonsense and set about turning Warwick into one of the
world’s leading centres for research in manufacturing. The War-
wick Manufacturing Group is now an ever-expanding set of
buildings housing cutting-edge research into smart cars, 3D print-
ing, robotics, materials science, biomedicine, cyber-security and
much else. It gets 95% of its funding from industry.
The focus on practical knowledge allows reform-centrism to
deal with three big problems. The ﬁrst is Britain’s lack of inclusive
growth. Lord Bhattacharyya helped to persuade Tata to buy an
ailing Jaguar Land Rover from Ford in 2008. JLR is now Britain’s
largest carmaker, accounting for 30% of production. Warwick of-
fers apprenticeships that allow students to earn degrees while
working for local ﬁrms. The second is productivity growth, which
has been disappointing for decades and ﬂat since 2008. Warwick
works with 1,000 world-class companies and advises more than
1,800 small and medium-sized ones. The third is regional imbal-
ance. Stuart Croft, the vice-chancellor, talks about the importance
of “place-making”—that is, building on the region’s strengths and
tackling its weaknesses. He argues that Mr Street’s arrival as
mayor has turbocharged place-making. The West Midlands has
long suﬀered from regional fragmentation and political rivalry.
Mr Street, a Tory mayor on Labour turf, is an “extremely energetic
symbol of collaboration”.
Warwick is not alone. Dozens of universities across the coun-
try have forged close relations with business. Sheﬃeld Universi-
ty’s Advanced Manufacturing Research Centre is pioneering new
ways of 3D printing and building modular nuclear reactors. Man-
chester University is beginning to feel like a British version of
MIT, with its industry-focused institutes and business-sponsored
research programmes. The University of Surrey has a space cen-
tre. The West Midlands is one of six areas that acquired mayors
last May, including its erstwhile rival, Greater Manchester.

Made in the Midlands, wasted in Westminster
These research centres have driven a striking manufacturing re-
vival. Britain recently saw its longest sustained growth in manu-
facturing output since 1994. It is also a world leader in niches such
as satellites, drones, aeroplane wings and racing cars. More For-
mula One teams are based there than anywhere else. Success in
manufacturing is no longer a matter of economies of scale and
cheap labour. Instead it relies on things that play to Britain’s ad-
vantages: bright ideas, clever design and rapid customisation. 
There is only one problem. However hard you try, in an over-
centralised country you cannot get away from Westminster poli-
tics. Brexit, a policy that started life as the hobby-horse of a Tory
clique, could be the biggest shock to manufacturing since the sec-
ond world war, disrupting supply chains, ruining just-in-time de-
liveries, forcing companies such as JLR to think again about being
based in Britain, and, on top of all that, making it harder for uni-
versities to attract world-class academics. In launching his criti-
cisms of Mrs May’s do-nothing government, Mr Boles borrowed
one of George Orwell’s more obscure phrases about “boiled rab-
bits”, who lack both courage and convictions. Another Orwell
phrase is perhaps even more apposite: that Britain resembles
nothing so much as a “rather stuﬀy Victorian family”, where “the
young are generally thwarted” and “most of the power is in the
hands of irresponsible uncles and bedridden aunts”. 7

THE Palace ofWestminster is one of the most depressing places
on Earth at the moment. The only people in a good mood are
swivel-eyed Brexiteers and fever-brained neo-Marxists. Every-
body else is miserable: frustrated by the intellectual vacuum at
the heart of the government and worried that Britain may be
drifting to disaster. Michael Heseltine, a Tory grandee, laments
that “we have eﬀectively no government”. Nicholas Boles, a for-
mer minister, says that Theresa May “constantly disappoints”. 
The reason for the depression is the failure of centrist politi-
cians to answer the questions posed by the two great wake-up
calls of the past decade. The ﬁnancial crisis demonstrated that
Britain was dangerously dependent on a single, volatile industry.
Brexit proved that millions of people felt that the country was not
working for them. Mrs May has shown signs that she has heard
the alarms, talking about launching a “modern industrial strat-
egy”, helping the “just-about-managing” and spanking snout-in-
the-trough bosses. But she has failed to turn words into deeds. 
The comfort is that there is more to the country than Westmin-
ster. Bagehot recently escaped from London to visit the Universi-
ty of Warwick and discovered a world that is every bit as pro-
blem-solving as Westminster is problem-bogged. Builders are
hard at work on a vast National Automotive Innovation Centre
which is due to open later this year. The wider region is also en-
joying a revival. In May the West Midlands acquired its ﬁrst elect-
ed mayor, Andy Street. Coventry has just won a national compe-
tition to succeed Hull as Britain’s city of culture.
But this slice of Middle Britain oﬀers more than just a collec-
tion of new buildings and initiatives. It oﬀers the outline of a new
governing philosophy. This philosophy is centrist in the sense
that it tries to build on the best ideas of the past 40 years, such as
recognising the creative power of business. But it is reformist in
that it accepts that the old model put too much emphasis on Lon-
don and ﬁnance, and forgot about making growth inclusive. Call
it reform-centrism. 
Reform-centrism’s starting-point is to build links between the
knowledge economy and ordinary ﬁrms. Britain has an old prej-
udice against linking high minds with low deeds like making
things. That prejudice used to be expressed in its preference for
training its ruling class in subjects such as classics and history.

50

International

The Economist Januar y 27th 2018

Winter sports

Skiing goes downhill

P U N T A S E R A U T A , S T M O R I T Z A N D W A N L O N G

Global warming and ageing populations pose a double threat to winter sports. The
industry’s response is making it all worse
THE great limestone peaks of the Dolo-
mites glow ochre and pink in the sum-
mer sunset. The slab of the Marmolada gla-
cier, the “Queen of the Dolomites”, glistens
a regal white. But get up close and the
sovereign is weeping. Countless rivulets of
meltwater stream down her face. 
The retreat of the Marmolada is heart-
breaking. So is what she leaves behind:
shrapnel, barbed wire, splinters of shacks
and the other detritus of the ﬁrst world war
in which Italian and Austro-Hungarian sol-
diers battled for the controlling heights. As
the glacier has shrunk, by more than half
since the war, its time capsule is being
opened. Last summer the ice gave up an
unexploded shell. Sometimes it brings up
dead soldiers, too. One appeared in 2010.
Another surfaced last summer on the Ada-
mello glacier farther west. Archaeologists
describe how the ice, in its pockets, pre-
serves not only the objects of war but also
its smell, from the grease of military cable-
ways to old sauerkraut.
Then there are the remains of a carefree
and careless time, when the crevasses be-
came dumps during the construction of ca-
ble-cars and ski lifts in the 1950s and 1960s.
With its highest lift reaching 3,265 metres,
the Marmolada was a spot for summer ski-
ing. That fun ended in 2003 because of ris-
ing temperatures and costs. Much the same
is happening to glacier skiing elsewhere. 
The greenhouse gases emitted since the

beginning of the Industrial Revolution
have so far warmed the world by roughly
1oC, on average. But the eﬀect has been
greater in the Alps, the mountain range
most visited for winter sports, which has
warmed by about 2oC. This has been most
intense in summer, which is why the Mar-
molada glacier has been melting so fast. In-
creasingly, though, global warming is af-
fecting the snow and ice in winters, too,
with profound consequences for the win-
ter-sports industry that has brought the
high life to poor Alpine valleys.
Daniel Scott of the University of Water-
loo, Robert Steiger of the University of
Innsbruck, and others, have looked at this
future warming in the context of the cities
chosen to host the Winter Olympics, from
Chamonix in 1924 to Pyeongchang in
South Korea next month and Beijing in
2022. Even if emissions are cut to meet the
target of the Paris climate agreement of
2015, only 13 of the 21 look certain to be cold
enough to host snow-sports in the 2050s.
With high emissions, the number would
drop to just eight in the 2080s (see chart 1,
next page). The sight of helicopters rushing
snow to Olympic sites in Vancouver in
2010 may be a harbinger of the future.
A more immediate worry for the win-
ter-sports industry is that skiing and snow-
boarding have peaked in the rich world.
Laurent Vanat, author of an annual report
on snow and mountain tourism, estimates

that the number of skier-days (visits to ski
slopes for part of or a whole day) in the
world’s main ski destinations fell from
about 350m in the 2008-09 season to
about 320m in 2015-16. This includes de-
clines in the United States, Canada, France,
Switzerland, Italy and, most markedly, in
fast-ageing Japan. The drop would be big-
ger still were it not for breakneck growth in
China, where skier-days nearly tripled in
the same period to 11m. American resorts
(usually small ones) have been closing
since the late 1980s. Those in the European
Alps, which account for about 40% of ski-
er-days, have mostly kept going, albeit
with various public subsidies. 

Snow country for old men
In the rich world, ageing skiers are gradual-
ly giving up the sport, although those who
keep going tend to have lots of time and
money to enjoy the snow. In America,
over-55s make up about a ﬁfth of skiers; the
most avid are aged 72 and older. Still, their
numbers are not being made up fast
enough by younger skiers, for several rea-
sons. In many places ticket prices have ris-
en faster than inﬂation, although resorts of-
fer discounts for season passes and early
booking. In America, there is a trend for
richer people to ski more than they used to,
and poorer ones to ski less. Non-whites, a
growing slice of the population, are less
keen on skiing. In Europe, school trips to
the slopes are less common, even in coun-
tries such as Austria and Switzerland that
think of themselves as nations on skis.
With global travel, those with money can
just as easily ﬂy to a beach in winter. 
Mountains have only recently become
playgrounds. In Mediterranean antiquity
they were sacred places where the heaven-
ly touched the earthly: Greek gods dwelt
on Olympus and Moses was given the law 

1

The Economist Januar y 27th 2018 

2 on Mount Sinai. Later they became places
of dread, where monsters lurked. The high-
est mountain in the Alps was known as
Montagne Maudite, the “cursed moun-
tain”, before becoming Mont Blanc.
In the age of reason, mountains became
natural wonders to be studied and con-
quered; Mont Blanc was ﬁrst scaled in 1786.
They grew to fascinate the romantic imagi-
nation, oﬀering a sense of the sublime,
hence visits by Lord Byron and the Shel-
leys in the early 19th century. Percy Shelley
penned a poem that became his declara-
tion of atheism; Mont Blanc as the antithe-
sis of Mount Sinai. Mary Shelley brought
together all three strands—the cursed, the
scientiﬁc, the romantic—when Franken-
stein’s monster confronted its creator on
one of the mountain’s glaciers.
As the 19th century progressed, the
draw of the Alps became medical, too. Da-
vos, in Switzerland, developed a reputa-
tion for treating tuberculosis with bright
sunlight and crisp air. Thomas Mann, who
nursed his consumptive wife in Davos,
used it as the setting for “The Magic Moun-
tain”. St Moritz, though known for its puri-
fying waters, chose to sell itself mainly to
fun-seekers. Winter holidays were born
there, according to lore, in 1864, when Jo-
hannes Badrutt made a wager with English
tourists spending summer in his hotel:
come back at Christmas and see the valley
bathed in winter sunshine; if you are dis-
satisﬁed, I will refund your expenses. Re-
turn they did, soon followed by Europe’s
high society. With the English came the
love of games and competitions, starting

The Olympic scorch

Climate reliability of Winter Olympics host cities
Reliable
Risky
Not reliable

1

2050s 
2100s
  LE*  HE†   LE*  HE†

Host city (Year) 

Beijing (2022)
Pyeongchang (2018)
Sochi (2014)
Vancouver (2010)
Tor ino (2006)
Salt Lake City (2002)
Nagano (1998)
Lillehammer (1994)
Alber tville (1992)
Calgar y (1988)
Sarajevo (1984)
Lake Placid (1980, 1932)

Innsbruck (1976, 1964)

Sapporo (1972)
Grenoble (1968)
Squaw Valley (1960)
Cor tina d’Ampezzo (1956)

Oslo (1952)
St Mor itz (1948, 1928)

Garmisch-Par tenkirchen (1936)
Chamonix (1924)

Source: D. Scott,
R. Steiger & Y. Fang

*Low-emissions scenar io
†High-emissions scenar io

No more magic mountain

Davos, Switzerland
Winter temperature, °C

Snow depth, cm

International 51

2

100

80

60

40

20

0

Five-month average*

Ten-year moving average

1865

1900

25

50

75

2000 16

Source: WSL Institute for Snow and Avalanche Research SLF

0

–

2

4

6

8

with ice-skating and sledding. Skiing was
imported from Norway. Arthur Conan
Doyle, author of the Sherlock Holmes de-
tective novels, was among the early enthu-
siasts in Davos, though he thought skis
“the most capricious things on Earth”. 
Skiing involved hours of hard climb on
foot or skis for just a few minutes of down-
hill thrill. Its popularisation would have to
await the introduction of mechanical as-
cent as well as the post-war economic
boom. By then antibiotics had relieved the
sanatoria of their tubercular residents, al-
lowing them to become hotels. Under its
“Snow Plan” of 1964, France created a net-
work of high, purpose-built resorts to draw
foreign tourists and prevent the depopula-
tion of Alpine valleys. Brought by Norwe-
gians, skiing caught on in North America,
too. Both the Vail and Aspen resorts in Col-
orado, born as mining towns, were turned
into ski resorts by veterans of the 10th
Mountain Division who had trained in
Colorado before serving in Europe. 
This expansion took place in decades of
abundant snow. Mountains can still get
large dumps, as delegates at the World Eco-
nomic Forum in Davos this year found out.
But the long-term trends are sobering.
Christoph Marty of the Institute for Snow
and Avalanche Research in Davos notes
that the snow comes later and melts earlier,
and the snowpack is thinning (see chart 2).
By the end of the century there will be little
snow in the Alps below 1,200 metres, and
much less of it even below 1,800 metres. 
In 2007 the OECD, a rich-world think-
tank, sounded the alarm. It projected that,
of 666 Alpine ski resorts, roughly 40%
would no longer get enough snow to oper-
ate a 100-day season (a rule of thumb for
making money) if the region warmed by
another 2°C. Roughly 70% might go if it
warmed by 4°C. The German Alps were es-
pecially vulnerable. In North America,
projections suggest that resorts close to the
western seaboard, especially in California,
face a ruinous loss of skiing days. Skiing in
Australia looks all but doomed.
Seeking colder, more snow-sure places,
developers in Canada have won authori-
sation to build a new resort in Valemount,

Ten-year moving
average

Average depth

1931 40

50

60

70

80

90 2000 10 17

*November-March

in the Rockies west of Edmonton, avoiding
the lawsuits by environmentalists and
ﬁrst-nation groups that have hampered
similar projects elsewhere. Meanwhile,
some American resorts are trying to coax
more snow out of the clouds by seeding
them with plumes of silver iodide. 
The main response of resorts has been
to invest heavily in artiﬁcial snow-making.
Messrs Scott and Steiger have reworked cli-
mate-model assessments to take this into
account. One looks at roughly 300 resorts
in the vulnerable eastern Alps (parts of
Germany, Austria, Switzerland and Italy).
Relying just on natural snow, about 70% of
them would no longer survive with 2°C
more warming, and 90% would be endan-
gered with 4°C. But with snow-making
these proportions fell to about 15% and 60%
respectively (see map, next page). 

Blow hard
First adopted by some American resorts in
the 1950s, snow-making has evolved from
patching bald ski runs to guaranteeing and
extending the season, especially around
Christmas. Even high stations such as St
Moritz (alt. 1,800 metres) start by creating a
base layer of artiﬁcial snow. In fact, opera-
tors often prefer it to the natural stuﬀ as it is
harder-wearing, and more resistant
to
melting. Athletes think it more reliable, too.
The French resort of Les Deux Alpes has
even started spraying snow on its glacier
(above 3,000 metres) to preserve it. The
machine-made stuﬀ is
called “pro-
grammed snow” in Italian, “technical
snow” in German and “snow from cul-
ture” in French. Just don’t call it “artiﬁcial”. 
Oﬀ-piste skiers cannot do without nat-
ural powder. But the mass of enthusiasts
on machine-groomed runs seem indiﬀer-
ent to whether they are sliding on cloud- or
man-made snow. Increasingly, what the
heavens provide is a bonus, helping to
create the winter ambience. “People do not
care about the snow, they care about the
sun,” says Paolo Cappadozzi, vice-presi-
dent of Dolomiti Superski, a vast domain
that includes the Marmolada. 
Resorts in the Dolomites invested
heavily in snow-making after two disas-

1

 
52 International

2 trously snowless seasons between 1988
and 1990. Even as the climate has warmed,
their ski season has lengthened. It may be
no coincidence that some of the world’s
biggest makers of snow machines are
based in the Dolomites.
As for environmentalists’ accusations
that ski resorts are wasting water, not to
mention electricity, Mr Cappadozzi is un-
moved. They account for a fraction of the
water used for agriculture or industry, he
argues. Most of the snow is made in a short
burst at the start of the season; the water is
only temporarily held on the slopes before
it ﬂows back into streams and aquifers.
Even so, Mr Cappadozzi reckons snow-
making accounts for about 13% of his ex-
penditure, a cost passed on to skiers.
In some places water really is scarce.
The small Kaberlaba station in Asiago (alt.
1,000 metres), in Italy, is on porous rock;
water quickly drains away. Rather than
make snow with expensive (and some-
times rationed) tap water, Paolo Rigoni, the
manager, started to use treated municipal
sewage in 2010, an idea for which he re-
ceived a presidential prize. Customers do
not mind skiing on recycled eﬄuent, he in-
sists: “It’s not that diﬀerent from water
treatment in some American cities.” 
Beyond snow-making there is “snow
farming”, as practised in the Austrian re-
sort of Kitzbühel. At an altitude of only 800
metres, it is often regarded as the most vul-
nerable of the big Alpine stations. The re-
sort stockpiles some snow in winter and
covers it through the summer for use in the
autumn. This allowed Kitzbühel to open its
ﬁrst runs on October 14th last year, before
most rivals; it hopes to keep skiers going for
200 days, its longest-ever season. Is this a
marketing wheeze? No, smiles Josef Burger,
boss of the Kitzbühel lift company, it is a
strategy to draw keen skiers and athletes:
“The early bird catches the worm.”
For Carmen de Jong of the University of
Strasbourg, the headlong rush into snow-
making is costly, environmentally damag-
ing and ultimately self-defeating. “Many
resorts are closing their eyes to reality,” she
says. She advocates a “deceleration” in the
winter-sports industry.
Nowhere are things more unreal than
in north-east Asia. Pyeongchang, and espe-
cially the area around Beijing, are certainly
cold in winter, but are largely snowless.
And with relatively low mountains, new
runs are being cut through forests to ac-
commodate the Olympic downhill races. 
Ski resorts are proliferating in China, in-
cluding those in the Chongli district north-
west of the capital that will host some of
the sites for the Olympics in 2022. They are
covered completely with artiﬁcial snow.
This is despite the fact that the water table
in Beijing has dropped alarmingly over the
decades, and enormous diversion works
are sending some of the Yangzi’s waters to
the capital. In a warming world things here

could get yet drier. Wind turbines may be
spinning on ridges in Chongli to provide
the snow-makers with green power; but
the surreal white streaks painted on barren
mountains, as if by a calligrapher’s hand,
seem to spell “waste”. 
China’s golf courses, which also have
an exorbitant thirst, face punitive water ta-
riﬀs. The Chinese state regards golf as a
source of corruption. But skiing is, for now,
clean middle-class family fun, and thus
gets an environmental free ride. “It is white
opium. It’s addictive,” pronounces He
Huan, a gym instructor who snowboards
at Wanlong, the biggest resort in Chongli.
Xi Jinping, China’s president, has spo-
ken of 300m Chinese taking up winter
sports. Where the leader points, the state
follows. Skier-days are growing by 20% a
year; 78 new (mostly small) resorts opened
in 2016 alone, says Benny Wu, a consultant.
“It could grow at this rate for another 15-20
years,” he declares. Chongli is served by a
four-lane highway; a high-speed railway
line will be completed by next year. Soon
Beijingers could live in the clean air of
Chongli and commute to the capital.
Around the world, operators are hop-
ing that just a fraction of the potentially
huge cohort of Chinese enthusiasts will
one day travel to their resorts. That is one
reason why most will not admit that they
face a bleak future. Many recognise it indi-
rectly, though, when they speak of diversi-
fying, particularly by expanding the sum-
mer season. In shrinking winters, they say,
ski resorts compete against each other; in
summer they can take a bigger chunk of
the fast-growing global tourist market. 
Another possibility is, like Johannes Ba-
drutt more than 150 years ago, to lure win-
ter visitors with no skiing at all. Rather
than invest in snow-making, the operators
of Stockhorn in Switzerland decided in
2004 to build a restaurant at the top of the
cable-car (alt. 2,100 metres) oﬀering visitors
candlelit dinners overlooking Lake Thun.
On the slopes there is winter hiking, night
snowshoeing, ice-ﬁshing, an igloo village
and more. “We changed from noisy skiing
to soft winter,” says Alfred Schwarz, its

The Economist Januar y 27th 2018

boss. “We have more visitors, especially in
summer, and we are more proﬁtable.” 
Perhaps in ever hotter summers more
holiday-makers will seek the coolness that
high altitudes provide. Might mountains
once again become summer retreats, as in
the 19th century? Chamonix, the home of
mountaineering, makes almost as much
money in summer as it does in winter. Chi-
nese day-trippers, among others, are keen
to glimpse Mont Blanc.
This is not a future which everyone be-
lieves in. Not every ski resort has an iconic
mountain that looks wonderful in sum-
mer. And for all the golf, horse-riding and
mountain-biking that may be on oﬀer,
nothing draws people quite like the thrill
of snow, many resort oﬃcials say. Their
mantra is: “Skiing is not everything. But
without skiing there is nothing.” 

On top of the world
Sooner or later (through regulation and
carbon pricing, or global warming) resorts
will have to rethink their model. Small,
low-lying stations will have to ﬁnd alterna-
tives to skiing or close. Rich ones in high
places and with good sources of water and
electricity may thrive. Chamonix, though
at just 1,000 metres, has pistes reaching
3,300 metres. “If we will not be able to ski
here any more, we will not able to ski any-
where,” says Eric Fournier, the mayor. “We
may even attract more people.” That may
be a problem, too. The Chamonix valley is
often shrouded in smog, the product of
wood-burning chimneys and the exhaust
fumes of lorries rumbling to the Mont
Blanc Tunnel between France and Italy. 
How paradoxical. Snow-sports enthu-
siasts think of themselves as great lovers of
nature and clean air, more conscious than
most people of the changing climate. Yet
their sport is becoming ever more man-
made, expensive and exclusive. Perversely,
it is also becoming more polluting, produc-
ing ever more emissions of greenhouse
gases to survive. That only hastens the
melting of the snow and ice. As Victor
Hugo put it: “How sad to think that nature
speaks and mankind will not listen.” 7

Schaf fhausen

50 km

Garmisch-Par tenkirchen

G E R M A N Y

Salzburg

Zür ich

Vaduz

S W I T Z E R L A N D

St Anton
am Arlberg

Sölden

Ischgl

Innsbruck

Kitzbühel

Wilder
Kaiser
Wildkogel
Ziller tal Arena

Davos

St Mor itz

o l o

D

Bolzano

Bellinzona

Trento

s

e

t

i

m

Alta
Badia
Marmolada
glacier
Val Gardena/
Grödental

A U S T R I A

Lienz

Alpine resorts
2°C r ise in average temperature
Viable, with natural snow
Viable, with snowmaking
Not viable

S L O V E N I A

Source: R. Steiger & B. Abegg

Business

The car industr y

General Uber-Motors

D E T R O I T

The carmaker takes an unexpected lead in the race to develop autonomous vehicles
GENERAL MOTORS reveals barn-sized
April 2017 GM’s market value was over-
truck at Detroit motor show. What else
hauled by Tesla’s, a ﬁrm that makes just
is new, you might now ask. But the launch
tens of thousands of ﬂashy EVs a year, com-
on January 20th of the Chevrolet Silve-
pared with the millions of vehicles rolling
oﬀ GM’s production lines. 
rado, a pickup that will go on sale at the
end of the year, highlights a surprising tur-
Sentiment has changed dramatically.
Since April GM’s share price has surged by
naround for America’s largest carmaker.
The good news is not just the Silve-
28%, giving the ﬁrm back the lead. By con-
rado’s outsized margins, which are impor-
trast, Tesla has struggled with the nuts-and-
tant for a ﬁrm that relies heavily on trucks—
bolts of carmaking. Production-line pro-
after Mary Barra, GM’s boss, gave an ebul-
blems have hampered a big roll out of its
lient performance at
an 
investors’
mass-market Model 3. Analysts at Barclays,
conference that coincided with the motor
a bank, say that GM is more “evolving
show, the release of GM’s quarterly results
mammal than…dying dinosaur”.
on February 6th are likely to include record
One reason for the reversal of fortunes
proﬁts. It is also that the money thrown oﬀ
is that GM has convinced investors that its
by vehicles such as the Silverado will help
current business is in ﬁne fettle. The cash
the ﬁrm navigate the tricky terrain that lies
ahead of all the world’s big carmakers.
One task is to ensure that their current
business of selling vehicles with internal-
combustion engines stays healthy. At the
same time, they must prepare for a future
of electric and autonomous cars (EVs and
AVs), which threaten to up-end business
models that have endured for a century.
Not so long ago, GM and its peers
seemed to be on a path to extinction. Tech-
nology ﬁrms such as Alphabet, Uber and
other pushy newcomers had started a race
to develop software that would control
driverless cars and to oﬀer ride-hailing and
ride-sharing services that are expected to
thrive at the expense of car ownership. In

Share pr ices, Januar y 1st 2017=100

Self-dr iving

Source: Thomson Reuters

J A S O N D

General Motors

J

F M A M J

140

130

120

Ford Motor

110

100

90

80

2017

J

18

The Economist Januar y 27th 2018 53

Also in this section
54 Qualcomm’s next ﬁne
55 Social media and misinformation
55 Luxur y goods go online
56 Amer ica’s avocado dearth
57 Mandator y arbitration in Amer ica
58 Schumpeter: GE’s foggy ﬁnances

For daily coverage of business, visit
Economist.com/business-ﬁnance 

generated by the Silverado and a range of
new pickups will help pay for big invest-
ments in EVs and AVs. It does not hurt GM’s
case that Ford, its main rival in Detroit, is
struggling (see chart). Jim Hackett, a new
boss brought in because of his technology
know-how, oversaw a lacklustre relaunch
in October that was sketchy on Ford’s vi-
sion for the future of transport services. On
January 24th the ﬁrm reported disappoint-
ing quarterly results, dashing hopes for
quick improvement. 
In contrast, GM is already well on the
way to reshaping itself. For starters, it has
diverted resources to where it is a market
leader. It has got rid of unproﬁtable busi-
nesses around the world, a process that
culminated in a decision last March to sell
Opel, its loss-making European carmaker,
to France’s PSA. At the same time, GM has
invested heavily in new pickups, such as
the Silverado.
Cadillac, GM’s premium brand, may
look like an exception to this happy rule.
Sales of just 350,000 cars in 2017 puts it far
behind its German rivals. Yet sales have
doubled since 2010 and it has grown faster
than any of them in recent years. Although
the ﬁrm does not disclose the information,
analysts at Morgan Stanley reckon that
Cadillac could be worth $13bn, around
20% of GM’s current value. Johan de Nyss-
chen, Cadillac’s boss, admits he runs a
“challenger brand”, but sniﬀs an opportu-
nity. The upheaval created as carmakers
grapple with new business models means
that “everyone has to start again”.
The most important reason for GM’s
comeback, though, is its success in con-
vincing investors that it is a leader not just
among established carmakers, but among
tech ﬁrms, too. It has rapidly accelerated
from the position of an also-ran in the ﬁeld
of autonomous vehicles to apparent

1

54 Business

2 leader. A scorecard issued annually by Na-
vigant, a consultancy, puts GM ahead of
the AV pack of carmakers and tech ﬁrms,
with Alphabet’s Waymo in second place.
That GM is ahead of Silicon Valley’s
risk-takers may seem surprising. But earlier
investments, which were once looked on
with scepticism, seem to be paying oﬀ.
Alan Batey, GM’s president for North
America, points to the manufacturing of
mass-market long-range EVs, where the
ﬁrm has a lead. The Chevy Bolt, the world’s
ﬁrst such vehicle, has been on sale for over
a year, beating Tesla’s Model 3 and the new
Nissan LEAF to market.
The Bolt is supposed to be the basis for
an ambitious autonomous ride-sharing
business. On January 12th GM announced
the latest version of its Cruise AV, a Bolt-
based robotaxi without a steering wheel
or pedals. GM plans to use it to launch a
commercial scheme in several cities, start-
ing next year. Rival tech ﬁrms and carmak-
ers are only running, or are planning to
launch, small test projects.

Revenge of the robotaxis
When GM paid $1bn in 2016 for Cruise, an
artiﬁcial-intelligence startup, many an-
alysts wondered whether it was throwing
away money. But the marriage of cutting-
edge technology and large-scale manufac-
turing seems to be paying oﬀ. The carmak-
er has learned to be more nimble; Cruise
has picked up how to make its ﬁddly tech-
nology robust enough for the open road.
As a result, GM can now mass-produce
self-driving cars, says Dan Ammann, sec-
ond-in-command to Ms Barra. Scale will
help steeply to reduce the cost of sensors,
which are the key components of an AV.
The ﬁrm is being rewarded because, un-
like other carmakers, it has assembled all
the parts of the puzzle you need to build
new transport services, says Stephanie
Brinley of IHS Markit, a consultancy. But
even if GM is no longer a dinosaur, risks re-
main. In particular, it may be too bullish in
its estimate of the market for robotaxis and
it may be placing too much faith in the
beneﬁts of being the ﬁrst to market.
The company expects demand to ex-
pand quickly. Costs of ride-hailing ser-
vices, it predicts, will fall from $2.50 a mile
now to about $1 as the main expense—the
driver—is eliminated. In America alone it
would be able to tap a market worth
around $1.6trn a year (representing three-
quarters of all miles travelled) as drivers
are lured from their cars to robotaxis. But
what Mr Ammann calls this “very big busi-
ness opportunity” comes with an inconve-
nient corollary. As car buyers become car
users, GM’s legacy business supplying ve-
hicles to drive will decline accordingly.
Critics think that GM may have acceler-
ated too swiftly and that it will have to en-
dure years of losses before robotaxis take
oﬀ. Even if things move fast, points out Be-

renberg, another bank, GM may not be the
one to beneﬁt. The main constraint in
growing a ride-hailing business now is ac-
quiring drivers. But when these are elimi-
nated, capital will be the only limit. And
that could mean huge ﬂeets of robotaxis
chasing passengers, forcing prices down.
Riders may then choose a brand they re-
cognise, such as Uber and Lyft, rather than
Maven, GM’s ride-hailing business.
If so, being ﬁrst would confer little ad-
vantage. And yet, if carmakers do not want
to accept their fate passively, they have lit-
tle choice but to remodel themselves. The
outsized Silverado and the sensor-packed
Cruise AV show that GM has the present in
hand—and that it is at least doing its best to
safeguard its future. 7

Qualcomm’s woes

A ﬁne habit

The chipmaker is ﬁned again for
anti-competitive practices
THE tech industry hardly needs another
reminder that trustbusters are on its
case. But the European Commission is al-
ways happy to oblige. On January 24th Eu-
rope’s executive body slapped a penalty of
€1bn ($1.2bn) on Qualcomm, one of the
world’s largest chip-designers, for abusing
its dominance in baseband processors, a
critical component in mobile phones. 
Large ﬁnes are becoming something of
a habit for Qualcomm, which will have
paid out nearly $1bn a year, on average, to
trustbusters the world over since 2015. This
week’s penalty, which amounts to nearly
5% of the company’s global annual rev-
enue, is a reﬂection of what Margrethe Ves-

The Economist Januar y 27th 2018

tager, the European competition commis-
sioner, described as its “very illegal
behaviour” between 2011 and 2016. During
that time, according to Ms Vestager, the
company attempted to shore up its domi-
nant position—it is estimated to supply up
to four-ﬁfths of essential types of base-
band chips—by paying Apple, its biggest
customer, billions of dollars in return for
being its exclusive supplier. 
The commission ruled that the strings
attached to these payments—which in-
cluded a clawback of part of the money,
should Apple use other suppliers—acted to
shut rivals out of the market. According to
internal documents from the time, Apple
had long considered sourcing its chips
from Intel, but it did not actually do so until
2016, after its deal with Qualcomm had ex-
pired. (The chipmaker insists that its prac-
tices did not violate European Union rules,
and plans to appeal against the commis-
sion’s decision.)
Qualcomm’s pricing strategy, too, has
won it few friends in recent years. Most
contentious is the way in which it licenses
its intellectual property to device-makers,
charging them a percentage of the total sell-
ing price of their devices. Apple alleges that
such royalties act as a tax on any innova-
tive features it adds to its products, and is
yet another way in which the chipmaker is
abusing its market power. Apple is seeking
damages of over $1bn from the chipmaker
in lawsuits ﬁled both in China and Califor-
nia. Regulators in Taiwan, South Korea and
China have already extracted penalties for
the licensing model; an investigation by
America’s Federal Trade Commission,
launched last year, is under way. 
In a rare bit of good news for the chip-
maker, regulators in Europe and South Ko-
rea last week gave their blessing to Qual-
comm’s $47bn acquisition of NXP, another
chip-design ﬁrm. Qualcomm hopes the
purchase will help it to boost its business
in 5G chips and the “internet of things”, as
connected devices are collectively called.
But Ms Vestager is not quite ﬁnished with
the ﬁrm. The commission is yet to rule on
whether it also engaged in predatory pric-
ing between 2009 and 2011 by setting the
prices of certain chips below cost, alleged-
ly to force a competitor out of the market.
The continued uncertainty, and Qual-
comm’s hefty penalties so far, may give the
company’s own predator, Broadcom, a ri-
val chipmaker, more ammunition. Its
$130bn oﬀer for Qualcomm was rebuﬀed
last year; a heated proxy ﬁght at Qual-
comm’s annual investor meeting in March
seems likely. Qualcomm argues that regu-
lators will never bless the union, which
would be the largest-ever tech deal. But
Broadcom reportedly plans to end the li-
censing model if it is allowed to make the
purchase, which would probably draw the
battle with Apple to a close. That is some-
thing for trustbusters to chew on. 7

The Economist Januar y 27th 2018 

Social media

Mark Zuckerberg’s
other headache

WhatsApp shows that Facebook’s
eﬀorts to ﬁght fake news may fail
“THERE’S too much sensationalism,
misinformation and polarisation in
the world today,” lamented Mark Zucker-
berg, the boss of Facebook, recently. To im-
prove things, the world’s largest social net-
work will cut the amount of news in users’
feeds by a ﬁfth and attempt to make the re-
mainder more reliable by prioritising in-
formation from sources which users think
are trustworthy.
Many publishers are complaining: they
worry that their content will show up less
in users’ newsfeeds, reducing clicks and
advertising revenues. But the bigger pro-
blem with Facebook’s latest moves may be
that they are unlikely to achieve much—at
least if the ﬂourishing of fake news on
WhatsApp, the messaging app which Face-
book bought in 2014 for $19bn, is any guide.
In more ways than one, WhatsApp is
the opposite of Facebook. Whereas posts
on Facebook can be seen by all of a user’s
friends, WhatsApp’s messages are en-
crypted. Whereas Facebook’s newsfeeds
are curated by algorithms that try to maxi-
mise the time users spend on the service,
WhatsApp’s stream of messages is solely
generated by users. And whereas Face-
book requires a fast connection, Whats-
App is not very data-hungry.
As a result, WhatsApp has become a so-
cial network to rival Facebook in many
places, particularly in poorer countries. Of
the service’s more than 1.3bn monthly us-
ers, 120m live in Brazil and 200m in India
(see chart). With the exceptions of Ameri-
ca, China, Japan and South Korea, Whats-
App is among the top three most-used so-
cial apps in all big countries.
Most of the 55bn messages sent every
day are harmless, but WhatsApp’s scale at-
tracts all sorts of mischief-makers. In South
Africa the service is often used to spread
false allegations of civic corruption and
hoax warnings of storms, ﬁres and other
natural disasters. In Brazil rumours about
people travel quickly: a mob recently set
upon a couple they suspected of being
child traﬃckers based on chatter on
WhatsApp (the couple escaped).
But it is in India where WhatsApp has
had the most profound eﬀect. It is now part
of the country’s culture: many older peo-
ple use it and drive younger ones crazy by
forwarding messages indiscriminately—
sometimes with tragic results. Last year,
seven men in the eastern state of Jhar-
khand were murdered by angry villagers
in two separate incidents after rumours cir-

Onwards and appwards

India, WhatsApp monthly active users, m

200

150

100

50

0

2013

14

Source: Statista

15

16

17

culated on WhatsApp warning of kidnap-
pers in the area. In a gruesome coda to the
incident, pictures and videos from the
lynching also went viral.
It is unclear how exactly such misinfor-
mation spreads, not least because traﬃc is
encrypted. “It’s not that we have chosen
not to look at it. It is impossible,” says Fi-
lippo Menczer of Indiana University’s Ob-
servatory on Social Media, which tracks
the spread of fake news on Twitter and oth-
er online services. Misinformation on
WhatsApp is identiﬁed only when it
jumps onto another social-media platform
or, as in India, leads to tragic consequences.
Some patterns are becoming clear, how-
ever. Misinformation often spreads via
group chats, which people join voluntarily
and whose members—family, colleagues,
friends, neighbours—they trust. That
makes rumours more believable. Misinfor-
mation does not always come in the form
of links, but often as forwarded texts and
videos, which look the same as personal
messages, lending them a further veneer
of legitimacy. And since users often receive
the same message in multiple groups, con-
stant repetition makes them more believ-
able yet.
Predictably, propagandists have em-
ployed WhatsApp as a potent tool. In
“Dreamers”, a book about young Indians,
Snigdha Poonam, a journalist, describes
visiting a political party’s “social media
war room” in 2014. Workers spent their
days “packaging as many insults as possi-
ble into one WhatsApp message”, which
would then be sent out to party members
to be propagated within their own net-
works. Similar tactics are increasingly visi-
ble elsewhere. Last month’s conference in
South Africa of the African National Con-
gress, at which delegates elected a new
party leader, saw a ﬂood of messages
claiming victory for and conspiracy by
both factions. With elections due in Brazil
and Mexico this year, and in India next
year, expect more such shenanigans.
Governments and WhatsApp itself are
keenly aware of the problem. In India au-
thorities now regularly block WhatsApp to
stop the spread of rumours, for instance of

Business 55

salt shortages. Regulators in Kenya, Malay-
sia and South Africa have mooted the idea
of holding moderators of group chats lia-
ble for false information in their groups.
WhatsApp is working on changing the ap-
pearance of forwarded messages in the
hope that visual cues will help users tell
the diﬀerence between messages from
friends and those of unknown prove-
nance. But ultimately it will be down to us-
ers to be more responsible and not blindly
forward messages they receive.
It is as yet unclear whether fake news
on Facebook will be less of a problem after
it changes its algorithms. The experience of
WhatsApp suggests, however, that the con-
cerns will persist. “Even with all these
countermeasures, the battle will never
end,” Samidh Chakrabarti, a Facebook ex-
ecutive admitted on January 22nd. “Misin-
formation campaigns are not amateur op-
erations. They are professionalised and
constantly try to game the system.” 7

Luxur y goods

Online, upmarket

M I L A N

Richemont, the world’s second-biggest
luxury ﬁrm, places a bet on digital
AYOUTUBE video featuring a woman
sporting a gold watch and driving a
convertible, which has been viewed on-
line nearly 5m times. A social-media “in-
ﬂuencer” with more than 11m followers on
Instagram posting photos of herself wear-
ing the same timepiece. A limited ﬂash sale
of the watch on Net-a-Porter, a website. 
Purveyors of pricey jewellery and
watches have been slow to embrace things
digital. But last year’s social-media cam-
paign to relaunch Panthère, a watch made
by Cartier, a French jeweller, is evidence
that they are waking up to the power of the 

1

Clickbait for plutocrats

56 Business

The Economist Januar y 27th 2018

2

online world. On January 22nd Riche-
mont, a Swiss luxury conglomerate that
counts Cartier among its brands, oﬀered to
buy the shares it does not already own in
Yoox-Net-a-Porter group (YNAP), a leading
luxury online retailer, for €2.7bn ($3.3bn).
Although the deal still faces hurdles, it is
likely to go ahead.
The days of double-digit growth in the
luxury industry are gone—it grew by 5%, to
€1.2trn, last year. Watches, in particular,
have had a rough time. Chinese demand
collapsed after an anti-corruption crack-
down; inventory languished, unsold. Last
year Richemont’s revenues dropped by
4%, to €10.6bn. But online sales of personal
luxury goods have continued to rise: they
now account for 9% of the total (see chart).
Bain & Company, a consultancy, reckons
that they will reach 25% by 2025. 
Online sales of “hard luxury”, such as
watches and jewellery, lag: they account
for just 5% of digital revenues. But that is up
from almost nothing a decade ago, and is
predicted to reach between 10% and 15% by
2025. And even if purchases are made in
physical stores, buying decisions are in-
creasingly made online: 68% of millenni-
als’ luxury purchases are “digitally inﬂu-
enced”, according to EY, a consultancy.
Small wonder that Richemont wants to
expand its footprint online. Last year the
group hired a chief technology oﬃcer, as
part of a management restructuring which
also did away with the role of CEO. It was
an early investor in Net-a-Porter, which it
merged in 2015 with Yoox, another e-com-
merce ﬁrm; it kept a 50% stake in YNAP, the
resulting combination. The hope is that
owning YNAP outright will allow Riche-
mont to learn things about the online
world that it could not with a stake alone. It
would also increase the Swiss ﬁrm’s expo-
sure to “soft luxury”, such as clothes and
bags, a segment in which the ﬁrm has
struggled, notes Melanie Floquet of JPMor-
gan Chase, a bank. 
For YNAP itself, the deal promises add-
ed investment at a time of intensifying
competition. Moët Hennessy Louis Vuit-
ton (LVMH) has launched its own online
platform, 24 Sèvres. Farfetch, another luxu-

Distinction benef its

Online luxur y-goods market, worldwide, €bn

Online market share, %

9

8

7

5

4

3

2

1

2003 05

07

09

11

13

15

17*

25

20

15

10

5

0

Source: Bain & Company

*Estimate

ry e-tailer, is planning to ﬂoat. Claudia
D’Arpizio, a partner at Bain, suggests that
Amazon, an online giant, could eventually
disrupt the luxury market, too.
Not everybody is convinced a takeover
of YNAP is needed. It is like buying an air-
line to go on holiday, says Luca Solca of Ex-
ane BNP Paribas, another bank. And the
deal is not without risks. One is whether
Federico Marchetti, YNAP’s boss, will in-
deed stay on once he has sold his 4% stake
(he says he will). Ms Floquet also worries
that the lack of a chief executive could lead

to feuds within the management.
Such concerns do not seem to bother Jo-
hann Rupert, Richemont’s founder and
chairman. In a statement on the oﬀer he
mentioned how, a century ago, Alberto
Santos-Dumont, a famous aviator, com-
plained to his friend, Louis Cartier, about
the diﬃculty of checking his pocket watch
while ﬂying. Cartier listened, and—eure-
ka!—the wristwatch was born. Full owner-
ship of YNAP should, Mr Rupert seems to
reckon, allow Richemont to listen to its cus-
tomers, in person or not. 7

The avocado market

Lack of guac

N EW Y O R K

Droughts, storms and global demand test America’s love aﬀair with avocado 
ALTHOUGH New Yorkers are not re-
nowned for their patience, they do
not seem to mind waiting their turn for a
fresh serving of avocado. At Avocaderia,
which claims to be the world’s ﬁrst avo-
cado bar, in Brooklyn, long queues stretch
from the counter outward into a large
food hall. 
The venue’s popularity is a sign of the
times: the avocado is fast becoming
America’s favourite fruit. Although do-
mestic production has stayed ﬂat, im-
ports have more than trebled over the
past ten years, according to the Depart-
ment of Agriculture. It estimates that the
annual consumption of the average
American has increased from about one
pound (0.5 kilograms) in 1989 to more
than seven pounds in 2016; total con-
sumption that year weighed in at 2.3bn
pounds.
America’s enthusiasm for avocados
may be dented, however, by soaring
prices. The wholesale price for a case of
48 avocados peaked at $83.75 in Septem-
ber, up from $34.45 a year before, accord-
ing to the American Restaurant Associa-
tion. Some restaurants were forced to add
a surcharge on guacamole, or temporar-
ily to scrap it from their menus altogether.
Others swallowed the bill. Chipotle, a
Mexican-themed restaurant chain, said
that “historically high avocado costs”
were a big reason why it posted dis-
appointing ﬁnancial results last year.
Supply shortfalls, brought about by
droughts, storms and wildﬁres in Califor-
nia, Chile and Mexico, help to explain the
jump. Production in California dropped
by 44% in 2017. Harvests in Mexico that
year were oﬀ by 20%. Labour strikes in
the country further reduced supply.
Growing global demand is also push-
ing up prices. Both Chile and Peru have
concluded trade agreements with China,
eliminating tariﬀs on their avocado ex-
ports. Peru’s avocado sales to China,

although small in volume compared
with Chile’s and Mexico’s, surged by
3,700% in 2016. Other countries, includ-
ing Canada and Japan, have also worked
up their appetite, raising aggregate im-
ports by 32% between 2014 and 2016.
Raising production will be tricky. This
is because avocados are a fussy plant to
grow, says Mary Lu Arpaia of the Univer-
sity of California, Riverside. Salinity
levels need to be just right, the slope of
the terrain not too steep and tempera-
tures stable. Erratic weather conditions
can easily kill the crop.
Even so, it seems a good bet that
queues like the ones in Brooklyn will
multiply. The founders of Avocaderia are
already looking for new opportunities to
expand after only having been in busi-
ness for ten months. Demand is huge
says one of them, Alessandro Biggi. “On
opening day we actually ran out of avo-
cados after just 90 minutes and things
haven’t slowed down since.”

Looking for the last avocado

Business 57

court, says Mr Colvin. But comparing arbi-
tration and court cases is not easy: the
terms of arbitration can vary widely, mak-
ing generalising across them diﬃcult. 
Another criticism of arbitration agree-
ments, voiced by Ms Carlson, the news an-
chor, is that they silence victims. Often the
proceedings have conﬁdentiality clauses
attached that prevent the employee from
speaking about the case, thereby protect-
ing repeat oﬀenders. Paula Brantner of
Workplace Fairness, an employee-rights
charity, contends that, without the threat
of litigation and the negative publicity it
brings, companies have less of an incen-
tive to root out bad behaviour. 
In the wake of the #MeToo movement,
legislators are now taking aim at arbitra-
tion in harassment cases. A draft bill ban-
ning mandatory arbitration in such cases
was introduced in Congress last month.
Supporters are cheered by the fact that the
bill’s sponsors span both sides of the aisle.
But lobbyists warn that its broad wording
could be construed as banning arbitration
in all workplace disputes. Previous such
proposals have never got oﬀ the ground.
Indeed, arbitration’s scope could wid-
en further. One open question is whether
ﬁrms can ban employees who are subject
to mandatory-arbitration clauses from ﬁl-
ing class-action suits. The US Chamber of
Commerce says such a ban is essential to
avoid needless claims. The Supreme Court
is due to rule before June on whether that
would violate labour rights. 
Such a prohibition has already been ap-
proved by Congress in the case of arbitra-
tion in consumer contracts (reversing a de-
cision by the Consumer
Financial
Protection Bureau). Firms may even start
slipping arbitration clauses into IPO docu-
ments, after Michael Piwowar of the Secu-
rities and Exchange Commission wel-
comed the idea in a speech last year. The
courtrooms may yet get emptier. 7

The Economist Januar y 27th 2018 

Arbitration agreements in Amer ica

Kept out of the courthouse

justify a suit in court. 
Others argue that arbitration is ill-
suited to employment disputes. In many
cases, it and its terms are in eﬀect imposed
on employees, says Imre Szalai of Loyola
University in New Orleans. New recruits
may not look at the small print, or think it
will ever apply to them. “It is a fantasy of
consent, rather than the real thing,” says
Katherine Stone at University of Califor-
nia, Los Angeles.
Another concern is that the process of
arbitration favours employers. They often
pick the ﬁrm of arbitrators. And individual
arbitrators are more likely to encounter the
employer than the employee in future
cases. Both features may lead the arbitrator
to be unconsciously biased towards the
employer, says Victoria Pynchon, a former
arbitrator with the American Arbitration
Association (AAA), who now runs She Ne-
gotiates, a training and consulting ﬁrm.
In some cases, biases are explicit. Ms
Pynchon was warned at the start of her ca-
reer
that awarding punitive damages
against employers could mean she would
never arbitrate another case. Large arbitra-
tion groups, such as the AAA, do have
codes of conduct that prohibit such partial-
ity. But Mr Szalai, of Loyola University,
questions whether these counteract im-
plicit biases. 
Unsurprisingly, perhaps, recent studies
suggest that outcomes and payouts in arbi-
tration are, on average, signiﬁcantly less
generous to employees than those made in

Bosses who behave badly are being shielded by contractual small print
IMAGINE wanting to sue your employer,
because you have been harassed or dis-
criminated against, only to ﬁnd that your
access to the courts is blocked. It turns out
you signed away your right to use the judi-
cial system when you started the job:
somewhere, hidden in the documents that
came with your employment contract,
was a clause obliging you to resolve future
disputes through private arbitration, rather
than in court.
An increasing number of American em-
ployees ﬁnd themselves in this situation.
Over half of non-unionised employees are
covered by arbitration requirements, esti-
mates Alexander Colvin of Cornell Uni-
versity, based on a survey in 2017 of 627
private-sector workplaces. Such agree-
ments have come under greater scrutiny
after the wave of workplace sexual-harass-
ment revelations last year. Gretchen Carl-
son, a former news anchor for Fox, a broad-
caster, has
called arbitration 
“the
harasser’s best friend”. Prevented by an ar-
bitration clause from suing the network,
Ms Carlson sued her boss and alleged ha-
rasser, Roger Ailes, instead.
Arbitration was originally designed for
commercial disputes. It has also become a
common feature of consumer services:
Airbnb’s terms of use include them, as do
mobile-phone contracts. But such clauses
increasingly show up in employment con-
tracts, too. Back in the early 1990s, only
around 2% of non-unionised workplaces
used arbitration for employment disputes,
says Mr Colvin. A number of Supreme
Court rulings since then have encouraged
its broader adoption.
The main advantage of arbitration,
compared with litigating in court, is speed:
a decision is reached, on average, a year be-
fore one is made in court. Instead of com-
plicated legal procedures, the parties in-
volved call in a neutral third person, often
an expert in the industry. The arbitrator lis-
tens to the evidence and makes a decision,
which is binding in most cases.
The popularity of arbitration is a sign of
how very costly and technical the courts
have become, says Andrew Pincus, a
partner at Mayer Brown, a law ﬁrm, who
advises companies on such procedures.
Signing up to arbitration in advance, he ar-
gues, does away with jockeying for legal
advantage over where the case is best
heard, which almost always keeps the par-
ties from settling. And it allows employees
to make claims that would be too small to

58 Business

The Economist Januar y 27th 2018

Schumpeter

The fog of war

If they are to save the ﬁrm, General Electric’s bosses and board need far better information
Perhaps GE has a better, parallel accounting system that it
keeps under wraps. But the public one reveals eight problems.
First, it has no consistent measure of performance. This year it has
used 18 deﬁnitions of group proﬁts and cashﬂow. As of Septem-
ber 2017, the highest number was double the average one. There is
a large gap between most measures of proﬁts and free cashﬂow.
Second, GE’s seven operating divisions (power, for example,
or aviation) are allowed to use a ﬂattering deﬁnition of proﬁt that
excludes billions of dollars of supposedly one-oﬀ costs. Their to-
tal proﬁts are almost twice as big as the ﬁrm’s. It is the corporate
equivalent of China’s GDP accounting, where the claimed out-
puts of each province add up to more than the national ﬁgure.
Third, GE does not assess itself on a geographical basis. Does
China yield solid returns on capital? Has Saudi Arabia been a
good bet? No one seems to know. This is unhelpful, given that the
ﬁrm does half its business abroad and that the long-term decline
in returns has taken place as the ﬁrm has become more global.
Fourth, GE pays little attention to the total capital it employs,
which has ballooned by about 50% over the past decade (exclud-
ing its ﬁnancial arm). Its managers rarely talk about it and have set
no targets. It is unclear which parts of the ﬁrm soak up dispropor-
tionate resources relative to proﬁts, diluting returns.
Fifth, it is hard to know if GE’s leverage is sustainable. Its net
debts are 2.6 times its gross operating proﬁts, again excluding its ﬁ-
nancial arm. That is high relative to its peers—for Siemens and
Honeywell the ratio is about one. Some of those proﬁts are paper
gains. And the average level of debt during the year is much high-
er than the ﬁgures reported at the end of each quarter. 
Sixth, the strength of GE’s ﬁnancial arm is unclear. The new in-
surance loss will lower its tangible equity to 8% of assets. This is
well below the comfort level, although regulators seem to have
granted it forbearance in order gradually to rebuild its capital. 
Seventh, it is hard to calibrate the risk this poses to GE share-
holders. GE likes to hint that its industrial and ﬁnancial arms are
run separately. But they are umbilically connected by a mesh of
cross-guarantees, factoring arrangements and other transactions.
Eighth, is GE sure that its industrial balance-sheet accurately
measures its capital employed and its liabilities? Some 46% of as-
sets are intangible, which are hard to pin down ﬁnancially: for ex-
ample, goodwill and “contract” assets where GE has booked pro-
ﬁts but not been paid yet. Hefty liabilities, including pensions and
tax, are also tricky to calculate. Based on GE’s poor record of fore-
casting, it seems that large write-downs are possible. On January
24th GE said that regulators were looking into its accounting.

IN THEIR documentary “The Vietnam War”, Ken Burns and
Lynn Novick, the directors, dwell on the ﬂawed information
that American politicians got from Indo-China. The generals on
the ground focused on the “kill ratio”, or the number of enemies
killed per American or South Vietnamese soldiers killed. That
bore no relationship to victory—North Vietnam quickly replaced
its dead soldiers. And it corrupted behaviour, leading American
troops to embellish numbers and count dead civilians as “wins”.
The curse of rotten information can strike companies, too.
That seems to be the case with General Electric (GE), which has
had a vertiginous fall. Its shares, cashﬂow and forecast proﬁts
have dropped by about 50% since 2015. On January 16th it dis-
closed a huge, $15bn capital shortfall at its ﬁnancial arm due to a
revision in insurance reserves. And on January 24th it revealed a
$10bn loss for the fourth quarter. In its core industrial arm, returns
on capital have sunk from 20% in 2007 to a puny 5% in 2017.
GE’s boss, John Flannery, an insider who took oﬃce in August,
must clear up the mess made by his predecessor, Jeﬀ Immelt. He
seems to recognise the gravity of the situation. In November he
gave a frank presentation to investors. This month he suggested
that GE might be broken up. Yet an unnerving sense lingers that
no one fully understands what has gone wrong.
Is the conglomerate formerly known as the world’s best-run
ﬁrm a victim of weak demand for gas turbines, a low oil price, lav-
ish digital initiatives, timing lags in client payments, morbidity
rates, bad deals, cost overruns or a 20-year squeeze in industrial-
equipment margins because of Chinese competition? You can
imagine GE’s 12-man board blinking at this list, like Pentagon gen-
erals huddled around maps of the Gulf of Tonkin which they are
too embarrassed to admit they do not understand.
Schumpeter’s theory is that GE’s ﬂow of ﬁnancial information
has become fantastically muddled. There is lots of it about (some
200 pages are released each quarter) and it is audited by KPMG.
But it oﬀers volume and ambiguity instead of brevity and clarity.
It is impossible—certainly for outsiders, probably for the board,
and possibly for Mr Flannery—to answer central questions. How
much cashﬂow does GE sustainably make and where? How
much capital does it employ and where? What liabilities must be
serviced before shareholders get their proﬁts?

Time for some command and control
GE’s situation is like that of the global bank conglomerates after
the ﬁnancial crisis. Citigroup, JPMorgan Chase and HSBC did not
entirely trust their own numbers and lacked a framework for as-
sessing which bits of their sprawl created value for shareholders.
Today, after much toil, the people running these ﬁrms know
whether, say, loans in California or trading in India make sense.
This does not happen naturally. If neglected, ﬁnancial report-
ing becomes a hostage to internal politics, with diﬀerent constitu-
encies claiming they bring in sales, while arguing that costs and
capital are someone else’s problem. Mr Flannery is a numbers
guy who wants to slim GE to its proﬁtable essence. But he is
trapped in a ﬁnancial construct that makes it hard to pursue that
mission intelligently. Until he re-engineers how GE measures it-
self, he will be stumbling about in the murk. 7

Finance and economics

Morgan Stanley

Tediously does it

N EW Y O R K

The recovery of Morgan Stanley is a huge achievement with, so far, modest results
MORGAN STANLEY emerged in 1935
ﬂects more than bad luck. Its newest
out of a global ﬁnancial disaster, as
growth initiative—to proﬁt from small cli-
one of Wall Street’s leading ﬁrms. In a rare
ents it ignored in the past—has yet to prove
shred of consistency in America’s turbu-
itself more than an interesting idea.
lent markets, history has repeated itself.
The rising esteem for Morgan Stanley
But it was a close call. An ill-timed infatua-
came grudgingly at ﬁrst, and then fast. The
tion with debt ahead of the 2007-08 ﬁnan-
ﬁrm and its chief executive, James Gor-
cial crisis threatened to add it to the indus-
man, are seen as having attributes com-
try’s
towering
funeral pyre, which
mon in many businesses but oddly rare on
consumed all its big competitors with the
Wall Street: a long-term vision; a plan to ex-
exception of Goldman Sachs.
ecute it; and a record of bringing it to life.
Of the two, Morgan Stanley came out of
All the more unusual, these attributes omit
the crisis the more tarnished, less for what
the deﬁning trait of the historically success-
it did than for what it was: less proﬁtable;
ful investment bank—wild, euphoric, glori-
less connected, through its former employ-
ous years of proﬁt (often then paid out to
ees, to political power; and less respected
staﬀ and lost in subsequent busts).
for having evaded disaster. But after the re-
lease of ﬁnancial results from the fourth
quarter of 2017, Morgan Stanley’s valuation
has surpassed Goldman Sachs’s. This re-
ﬂects not only the improvement in its prof-
itability but also investors’ greater conﬁ-
dence in how it is managed.
Goldman, with some justice, ﬁnds the
comparison unfair. The two ﬁrms make
roughly equivalent returns and each is top
dog in global league tables for segments of
the capital markets. Goldman might easily
reclaim its edge in the next quarter. But its
approach has a growing legion of doub-
ters. Fixed-income, currencies and com-
modities, the mysterious proﬁt centre from
which its chief executive, Lloyd Blankfein,
graduated, has had a rough stretch that re-

Morgan Stanley
Compensation as
% of investment-
banking revenue

Wealth-management
revenue as % of total

Those were the days

Sources: Morgan Stanley; Bloomberg

80

60

40

20

2007

30

20

10

50

40

13

15

09

11

0

17

100

0

The Economist Januar y 27th 2018 59

Also in this section
60 Buttonwood: Volatility’s eer ie calm
61 Microﬁnance and disaster relief
61 Europe’s direct-lending funds
62 Niger ia’s central-banker shortage
63 Poverty and migration
63 Hyper inﬂation in Venezuela
64 Free exchange: Bank regulation

For daily analysis and debate on economics, visit
Economist.com/economics

Since the ﬁnancial crisis, Morgan Stan-
ley’s results have improved steadily, albeit
only to their current level of barely ade-
quate. Its return on equity in the recently
completed year (adjusting for the oddities
of America’s recent tax reform) is 9.4%, not
quite up to that of a run-of-the-mill utility.
Mr Gorman’s new targets are for 10-13%,
somewhat closer to the overall market av-
erage. On a recent conference call a ﬁnan-
cial analyst asked him why the target was
not higher. After all, Morgan Stanley will
enjoy a big boost from the tax overhaul,
which will cut its tax rate from over 30% to
the mid-20s. Mr Gorman demurred, stress-
ing that the ﬁrm would only project returns
it felt were feasible even if conditions be-
come rough. To aim higher—and in particu-
lar to replicate the pre-crisis returns on equ-
ity of more than 20%—would mean “doing
something you don’t want us to do”.
Some of this coyness stems from Wall
Street’s new arithmetic. Since 2006, Mor-
gan Stanley’s capital has grown from $35bn
to $77bn and it has slashed its debt: that has
eaten into returns on equity. Capital re-
quirements may fall a bit as regulatory
models are tweaked (see Free exchange)—
Morgan Stanley has been especially aﬀect-
ed by some of their quirks—but the permis-
sive mood of the past is unlikely soon to re-
turn. Often, when a chief executive
explains barriers to proﬁtability, a com-
pany’s share price sinks. Mr Gorman’s
comments had the opposite eﬀect. Sobri-
ety is in vogue.
Underlying the results are large changes
to the ﬁrm. Its hallways still buzz with slim,
well-dressed, intense people of indetermi-
nate age. But they are not quite the self-
anointed masters of the universe of the
pre-crisis era. Pay as a share of investment-
banking revenues has dropped from a
peak of 78% in 2008 to 35% (see chart). In-

1

60 Finance and economics

The Economist Januar y 27th 2018

2 vestment banking itself is less important
these days, accounting for about half the
overall business. In contrast the ﬁrm’s
wealth-management income has grown
sharply since the crisis, and has become
even more central to its operations since it
bought into Citigroup’s wealth-manage-
ment business in 2009. Controversial then,
the move appeared foolish a year later
when the process of integration faltered.
It is now cited as an obvious and unre-
peatable opportunity. Revenues and pro-
ﬁts have grown quickly. Margins, Mr Gor-
man said, had reached levels only ever
achieved by a broker in 1999 during the dot-

com bubble (by Smith Barney, whose rem-
nants were picked up in the Citi acquisi-
tion). That, he suggested, might mean they
were peaking. In response, Steven Chubak,
an analyst at Instinet, a broker, created
side-by-side comparisons of the two busi-
nesses to illustrate how much their ap-
proaches diﬀered. Three-quarters of Smith
Barney’s revenues, compared with a ﬁfth
of Morgan Stanley’s, came from transac-
tions, ie, from commissions on stock and
bond sales, and so were highly volatile.
The emphasis since has shifted.
Fees charged as a percentage of assets
are the most important source of income.

But mortgages and other loans to clients, ﬁ-
nanced by deposits, are a second, fast-
growing one. The loans are backed by the
borrowers’ securities holdings, helping ex-
plain why credit losses to date have been
almost non-existent. Attracting deposits is
not as hard as might be expected from the
aﬄuent customers Morgan Stanley pur-
sues. Of course they already have bank ac-
counts, but many conventional retail
banks pay almost no interest, are starting
to charge for current accounts and, in eﬀect,
are encouraging clients to look elsewhere.
As this trove of information grows, giv-
ing Morgan Stanley data on clients’ in-

1

Buttonwood

The times they aren’t a-changing

That eer ie calm…

CBOE volatility index (VIX)

Over 30 indicates a high
level of uncer tainty

95

2000

05

10

15 18

Source: Thomson Reuters

80

60

40
30

20

0

Long-term average

1990

Volatility has been low, and that encourages risk-taking
MAY YOU live in boring times. Finan-
cial markets have become dull, if
proﬁtable. The S&P 500 index, America’s
leading equity benchmark, has notched
up its longest-ever streak without a 5% re-
versal. Bond yields may have inched up
in recent months, but are still at the bot-
tom of historical ranges. Institutions
famed for their trading prowess, such as
Goldman Sachs, have seen proﬁts dented
by the quiescence of the markets. 
This lack of market volatility owes
much to the steadiness of monetary poli-
cy since the depths of the ﬁnancial crisis.
Central banks have kept short-term rates
low and have intervened to push down
bond yields through their programmes of
quantitative easing (QE). The classic
method of pricing ﬁnancial assets is to say
they are worth the discounted value of fu-
ture cashﬂows; since central banks have
kept the discount rate steady, prices have
been steady too.
The late Hyman Minsky, an econo-
mist, thought that long booms sowed the
seeds of their own destruction. He argued
that, when the economy was doing well,
investors tended to take more risk (such as
taking on more debt). These speculative
positions are vulnerable to a shock, such
as a sudden rise in interest rates, which
can turn into a fully ﬂedged crisis.
In these days of sophisticated markets,
speculators are not restricted to their own
capital or even to borrowed money to buy
assets to bet on the good times continu-
ing. They can use derivative instruments
to bet on prices. Indeed, there is actually a
market in volatility. 
The steadiness of the S&P 500 shows
that actual, or realised, volatility has been
low. But investors can also hedge against a
sharp move in the stockmarket (in either
direction) by taking out an option, giving
them the right to buy or sell equities at a

given price within a set period. The price,
or premium, they pay for this option re-
ﬂects a lot of factors. But one of the most
important is how choppy investors expect
the market to be in future. This measure is
the “implied” volatility of the market and
is the basis for the well-known Vix, or vola-
tility index.
Speculators who believe markets will
stay calm can sell (or “write”) options on
volatility, earning premium income. The
more sellers there are, the more the price,
or premium, will fall (and the lower the Vix
will be). The danger, then, is that a sudden
pickup in volatility could result in specula-
tors suﬀering losses. A linked issue is that
investment banks use a measure called
“value at risk” to help determine the size of
their trading positions; reduced volatility
will encourage them to take more risk.
Since volatility tends to rise when asset
prices are falling, this could be accompa-
nied by much wider ﬁnancial distress.
Two recent papers* from the New York
Federal Reserve have examined this issue.
The authors point out that low volatility
tends to be persistent; historical data show
long periods of calm interspersed with

short spikes in the form of crises (see
chart). So low volatility today is not neces-
sarily a warning sign. The authors write:
“On average, extremely low volatility to-
day predicts low volatility in the future,
not higher.”
However, the Vix measures the im-
plied volatility over just a one-month ho-
rizon. It is possible to calculate implied
volatility over a two-year period, creating
a slope akin to the yield curve, which
measures interest rates for diﬀerent lend-
ing durations. Back in 2006-07 this volatil-
ity curve was very ﬂat, suggesting that in-
vestors thought that conditions would
continue to be rosy. That may explain
why so many were caught out by the pro-
blems in the subprime mortgage market. 
This time, the Fed says the volatility
curve is steeply upward-sloping (since
1996 the slope has been steeper only 15%
of the time). This suggests that investors
are not complacent at all, and think that
volatility may soon return. Investors
seem to think the Vix may be as high as
20% (compared with around 11% today)
within the next one or two years. 
The obvious catalyst for such a change
is monetary policy. The Fed is pushing up
interest rates and slowly unwinding QE;
the European Central Bank is scaling back
its bond-buying. So far, this process has
occurred without any great alarms. But
there may yet be a “tipping point”, when
higher rates cause problems for investors
and borrowers. In any cycle there is al-
ways some institution that has taken a lot
more risk than the rest. If a storm comes
this year, the world will discover who has
gone out without a coat or umbrella.

...............................................................

* “The low volatility puzzle: are investors complacent?”
and “Is this time diﬀerent?” by David Lucca, Daniel
Rober ts and Peter Van Tassel 

Economist.com/blogs/buttonwood

The Economist Januar y 27th 2018 

2 come, holdings and spending, it will create
new sources of value. The ﬁrm employs
16,000 ﬁnancial advisers (formerly known
as brokers) who, over time, may form
teams made up of people with very diﬀer-
ent skills, such as in taxes or inheritance
law. A linked online oﬀering that the ﬁrm
hopes will appeal to millennials was re-
cently launched, enabling investment de-
cisions to take into account preferences
such as environmental concerns. 
The ﬁrm sees its best opportunities in
cosseting its clients so well that they bring
in some of the vast investments they hold
elsewhere. The rub is that others doubtless
feel the same. Wells Fargo and Bank of
America Merrill Lynch have somewhat
similar approaches and are doing well, as
are many independent ﬁnancial advisers.
Electronic start-ups such as Wealthfront
and Betterment claim to do most of what
the older ﬁrms do, but at a fraction of the
cost. They are attracting younger custom-
ers. Betterment says its clients are, on aver-
age, 37; Morgan Stanley’s are in their late
50s or early 60s. A harder-to-track cohort of
investors ignore advisers altogether and in-
stead invest directly in cheap, passively
managed funds.
In short, with so many ways to fail,
even Mr Gorman’s decade-long record
cannot quell all doubts. But scepticism is
countered by the fact that it all seems to be
working. And enough consistent progress
has been made to suggest Morgan Stan-
ley’s returns may one day climb beyond
the “barely adequate”. 7

Microﬁnance and climate change

Bucks after the
bang

Using microcredit in disaster relief
BOTH, in diﬀerent ways, worry about li-
quidity. And global warming may, in-
deed, be bringing meteorologists and ﬁ-
nanciers
together. On 
January 18th,
VisionFund, a microlending charity, and
Global Parametrics, a venture that crunch-
es climate and seismic data, launched
what they billed as the “world’s largest
non-governmental climate-insurance pro-
gramme”. The scheme will oﬀer microﬁ-
nance to about 4m people across six coun-
tries in Asia and Africa aﬀected by climate-
-change-related calamities. 
Natural disasters are becoming more
frequent and severe. They disproportion-
ately aﬀect poor countries, where many
eke livings from vulnerable agricultural
land. Yet it is often in the aftermath of di-
saster that credit is hardest to obtain. As
non-performing loans rise and the percep-

Finance and economics 61

after a disaster, helping them meet in-
creased demand, for an annual premium
of about 0.5% of the value of their portfoli-
os, in addition to the normal cost of funds.
Global Parametrics provides insurance
cover through a contingency-credit facility
from the InsuResilience Investment Fund
(formerly known as Climate Insurance
Fund), an initiative of KfW, a German gov-
ernment development bank, and risk capi-
tal from the Natural Disaster Fund, backed
by the British government. Both also aim
to raise money from private investors. 
Other
institutions could help. The
World Bank has created a disaster risk-
pooling system that covers the Paciﬁc Is-
lands, which are very prone to climate-re-
lated hazards. The countries pay a pre-
mium into a common pot, from which
they can draw cash after a calamity. Some
of the bank’s programmes also include a
“zero” component, where funds allocated
to a project can be switched to emergency
relief at the government’s request, if a di-
saster is declared. In both cases, a share of
the proceeds could go to recovery lending.
Whether MFIs would qualify for that
money is up to the government. And that
hints at a broader problem. Though inde-
pendent, microlenders may be hindered in
times of crisis if they are not part of nation-
al disaster-contingency plans, says Mi-
chael Goldberg of the World Bank. Private
dollars can help make recovery lending a
bigger thing. But to gain greater currency,
local regulators and governments must
also be convinced it works. 7

Pr ivate debt in Europe

The direct route

M I L A N

Some investment funds will lend where
banks fear to tread
WHEN Caronte & Tourist, a Sicilian fer-
ry company, needs a new ship, it is
cheap and easy to borrow from a bank. But
in 2016, when Caronte’s controlling fam-
ilies wanted to buy back the minority stake
held by a private-equity ﬁrm, banks balked
at the loan’s unusual purpose. Edoardo Bo-
nanno, the chief ﬁnancial oﬃcer, also wor-
ried that the €30m ($33m) in extra bank
debt might make shipping loans harder to
obtain from them in future. So he turned
instead to a direct-lending fund run by Mu-
zinich & Co, an asset manager. 
Such funds are only about a decade old
in Europe (and not much older in America,
where they started). Assets under manage-
ment at Europe-focused funds increased
from a mere $330m at the end of 2006 to
$73.3bn by mid-2017, which 
includes
$27.9bn of “dry powder”, or funds yet to be 

1

Small pots of liquidity

tion of risk increases, microﬁnance institu-
tions (MFIs) rein in lending; they receive lit-
tle support
from donors and relief
programmes, which tend to favour hu-
manitarian aid. Stewart McCulloch, Vi-
sionFund’s insurance boss, says that “re-
covery lending”—small loans with special
terms—can act as a “safety net” by helping
stricken households restart businesses.
Evidence suggests the money is usually
paid back. In 2016, using a £2m ($2.7m)
grant from the British government’s devel-
opment arm, VisionFund’s MFIs provided
microloans to 14,500 families in Kenya,
Malawi and Zambia hit by El Niño, a
weather
system 
that
caused severe
droughts and ﬂoods. In all three countries,
MFIs ended up lending far more than ex-
pected. Yet 93% of loans were repaid by
May 2017, and missed payments were rarer
than usual. Many borrowers made their
livelihoods more disaster-proof by starting
more drought-tolerant activities such as
trading or horticulture. MFIs, for their part,
found new clients among those their nor-
mal lending criteria excluded—without
jacking up interest rates.
Encouraging though this is, expanding
operations at such a juncture is diﬃcult.
According to Jonathan Morduch of New
York University, the eﬀectiveness of such
loans relies heavily on their speedy dis-
bursement. Yet MFI staﬀ often live near af-
fected areas and so need time to get back
on their feet after disaster strikes; many
lack, for example, backup IT systems. Lots
of lenders are inhibited from oﬀering more
ﬂexible terms to their unfortunate borrow-
ers by loss-provision rules and write-
down formulas set by regulators.
But the biggest diﬃculty is in raising ﬁ-
nance for recovery lending. Grants may
not be available. This month’s initiative
will give MFIs prompt access to liquidity

62 Finance and economics

2

lent out (see chart). In 2017 alone 24 direct-
lending funds raised a record $22.2bn. Such
funds do what they say on the tin: lend di-
rectly to ﬁrms, usually in the form of big,
multi-year loans. The borrowers are often
either companies that are too small to raise
equity or debt on capital markets, or priv-
ate-equity funds buying such ﬁrms. 
Blair Jacobson of Ares Management, an
asset manager, says that the pummelling
banks took in the global ﬁnancial crisis
“turbocharged” the direct-lending indus-
try. Ares set up its European direct-lending
arm, now one of the largest with $10.8bn
under management, in September 2007, as
the crisis broke. Most of the other direct-
lending ﬁrms moved into the business be-

cause of the crisis and the dearth of bank
credit that ensued. Some were founded ex-
pressly for direct lending, notably Hayﬁn
Capital Management in 2009, which in
2017 raised more than €3.5bn.
Despite superﬁcial similarities, these
ﬁrms are far from being banks. Many start-
ed out in more complex credit markets.
ICG, for example, specialised in the riskier
tranches of loans to private-equity ﬁrms.
Another, BlueBay Asset Management,
started as a bond-fund manager.
Direct lenders raise money from institu-
tional investors, to whom they usually pro-
mise returns of around 10% or even 15%. So
they cannot compete with the interest
rates banks charge borrowers. But they do

Monetar y policy

Central banking on autopilot

Nigeria is short of rate-setters
IN THEIR quest to stabilise the job mar-
ket, central banks are setting a bad
example. Jerome Powell, whom senators
this week conﬁrmed as the next chair-
man of America’s Federal Reserve, will
lead an institution with three existing
vacancies on its seven-member board,
and a fourth that will open up imminent-
ly. Not since July 2013 has its rate-setting
committee boasted the full complement
of 12 voting members.
This monetary undermanning is,
however, much worse in Nigeria. Its
monetary-policy committee was unable
to meet as scheduled on January
22nd-23rd because it lacked the six mem-
bers necessary for a quorum. Five recent
nominees still await conﬁrmation by the
country’s Senate. The chamber is holding
up all but a few executive appointments
in retaliation for President Muhammadu

Nobody minding the shop

Niger ia, % change on a year earlier
Consumer pr ices

20

15

10

5

0

8

4

+

0

–

4

2014

15

16

17

GDP

2014

15

16

17

Source: Haver Analytics

Buhari’s failure to remove an oﬃcial (the
acting anti-corruption tsar) whom the
Senate twice rejected. In the absence of a
monetary-policy meeting (and the
lengthy communiqué that eventually
follows it), the central bank posted a brief,
scanned note on its website, explaining
that it would not tinker with its existing
policy stance.
According to some economists, this is
in fact just how monetary policy should
be done. Milton Friedman, for example,
thought the Fed should be replaced by a
computer that would increase the money
supply at a steady rate. Others have
proposed more elaborate, but equally
mechanical, rules. Allowing a few wise
men and women to meddle with the
money supply, governed by their own
discretion, is more trouble than it is
worth, these economists argue. The best
central bankers strive, with all the beneﬁt
of their erudition and experience, to be as
boring as machines anyway.
In Nigeria, sadly, central banking is far
from boring. Although growth has re-
turned and the stockmarket is booming,
the country still suﬀers from stagﬂation: a
weak recovery combined with stubborn-
ly high price pressures. In such a predica-
ment, warm-blooded policymakers
sometimes rush to ﬁght the “stag”—by
cutting interest rates prematurely—before
they have properly quelled the “ﬂation”.
A Friedmanite might therefore hope that
Nigeria’s rate-setting committee remains
inquorate for a little longer. 
In the scanned note, the central bank
welcomed recent improvements in ﬁ-
nancial conditions and promised to
continue its “proactivity”. One diﬃcult
art a computer would struggle to repli-
cate is that of irony.

The Economist Januar y 27th 2018

oﬀer speed and ﬂexibility. In Caronte’s
case, for instance, Mr Bonanno liked the
ﬂexibility of Muzinich’s loan, such as the
ability to pay it back early. The largest direct
lenders, like Ares or Hayﬁn, can also com-
pete on their ability to write large loans,
even for several hundred million euros, oﬀ
their own bat. Since the ﬁnancial crisis,
banks’ lending limits have been reduced,
and syndication to even a dozen others
can be like “herding cats”, in the words of
Hayﬁn’s Andrew McCullagh.
Direct-lending funds also diﬀer from
banks in how much of their lending goes to
private-equity ﬁrms. More than four-ﬁfths
involves private equity in some way,
whether to ﬁnance a buy-out or to lend
money to a private-equity-owned ﬁrm.
But that is changing. Many funds have
formed ties with ﬁrms that become repeat
customers when they need more ﬁnanc-
ing. And direct lending is becoming better
known as a ﬁnancing option. For certain
funds, a sizeable portion of their lending
now has no private-equity “sponsor-
ship”— about 40% for Hayﬁn, for instance,
a third for Muzinich, and nearly half in Mu-
zinich’s separate (albeit small) Italian fund. 
The industry is also expanding geo-
graphically. As recently as 2013, Britain ac-
counted for almost half of direct-lending
deals; transactions elsewhere were often
done by fund managers jetting in from
London. But many European countries
have allowed funds to lend without a full
banking licence. And the EU plans to har-
monise the direct-lending market. In the
ﬁrst three quarters of 2017, Britain’s share of
new deals fell to a shade over a third. Many
ﬁrms have set up regional oﬃces, or even
country-speciﬁc funds such as Muzinich’s
Italian, French and British funds.
Direct lending covers a broad spectrum
of activity. At one end is Muzinich, with its
strong focus on small enterprises. This is a
far cry from Ares’s boasts of being able to
lend €300m at short notice (although Ares
does lend to smaller ﬁrms, too). Yet both
are part of a continuing structural shift in
Europe, as a result of which small and mid-
sized ﬁrms have a viable alternative to
banks as a source of credit. 7

One direction

Europe-focused direct-lending funds

Assets under management at year end, $bn

“Dr y powder”

 (Cash in hand)

Invested

2006

08

10

12

14

16 17†

80

60

40

20

0

Source: Preqin

    †On June 30th

The Economist Januar y 27th 2018 

Finance and economics 63

Hyper inﬂation in Venezuela

Bolívar blues

C A R A C A S

As inﬂation soars, the currency slides
EVEN a modest rate of inﬂation com-
pounds over time. This is why your
tipsy grandfather might wistfully recall
how little a pint of beer cost in his heyday.
In Venezuela, where prices are rising at a
four-ﬁgure annual rate, the good old days
were last month. The defence minister,
Vladimir Padrino López, on January 19th
urged business leaders to peg back prices
to their levels of December 15th, when
presumably everything was just ﬁne.
The spending power of the bolívar,
Venezuela’s currency, had collapsed long
before then. The Economist’s Big Mac
Index gives a rough guide to how fast it
has fallen. The index is based on the idea
of purchasing-power parity (PPP), which
says a fair-value exchange rate is one that
leaves consumer prices the same in diﬀer-
ent countries. In our index, the price of a
Big Mac is a proxy for all goods. In Cara-
cas, this week, a Big Mac cost 145,000
bolívars; in American cities, it cost an
average of $5.28. The ratio of those prices
gives a PPP exchange rate of 27,500 bolí-
vars. Two years ago, the rate was 27 bolí-
vars. By this yardstick, the currency has
lost 99.9% of its value in almost no time. 
In fact the Big Mac gauge probably
understates the general rise in prices and
the slide in the currency. DolarToday, a
US-based website that publishes real-
time quotes, puts the black-market ex-
change rate at around 260,000 bolívars to
the dollar, and falling. This rate has be-
come one of the few reliable yardsticks
against which to peg prices in Venezuela.
Have your tyre replaced in Caracas, and

the mechanic will check the DolarToday
exchange rate before presenting the bill.
Imported goods, such as tyres, have a
reference dollar price. But a lot of local
prices do not keep up with the collapsing
value of money. A monthly mobile-
phone tariﬀ is 38,000 bolívars, or 15 cents;
a haircut is 25 cents. Wages tend to lag
behind prices, in large part because it is
so hard to keep up with them. The
monthly minimum wage has just been
raised for the umpteenth time, to around
800,000 bolívars. That is less than $4 at
the current black-market exchange rate. If
wages were perfectly indexed, it would
serve only to speed up inﬂation. But their
slow and uneven adjustment means the
pain of hyperinﬂation is shared haphaz-
ardly. As Juan Perón of Argentina suppos-
edly said, if prices take the lift, wages
cannot take the stairs. 

Good golly, Miss Bolí!

Venezuelan bolívar to the $

Implied PPP* conversion rate, inver ted log scale

1

10

100

1,000

10,000

100,000

2010

12

14

16

18

Sources: McDonald’s;
The Economist

*Purchasing-power par ity, based
on The Economist’s Big Mac index

migrant. That suggests a snowball eﬀect: if
lots migrate, the hesitant may follow.
Household income rises, largely be-
cause men are able to work more hours
each day. Sree Jotin, an agricultural la-
bourer with a small plot of his own in
Rangpur, reckons that he earns about 250
taka a day in the ﬁelds. In Dhaka, where he
worked as a cycle-rickshaw driver last No-
vember and December, he pulls in about
700. He pays 100 taka to rent a rickshaw
and 110 for food, but makes far more than
he could at home (he sleeps in a corner of
the garage, so has no housing costs).
Though he believes Dhaka’s ﬁlthy air is da-
maging his health, he is glad he moved.
Village life is profoundly aﬀected, and
not just because more men are sending
money home. With so many workers ab-
sent, agricultural wages rise. Oddly, house-
holds that are encouraged to send some-
body to a city end up earning slightly more

from rural work than households in the
control villages. Many men shuttle be-
tween country and town, working where
they can. Researchers are now trying to
work out whether urban economies have
been aﬀected. Fully 140,000 villagers were
helped to move in 2017. Such a large wave
could have depressed pay for unskilled
work in the cities. 
Could the same approach work else-
where? Mr Mobarak points out that Ban-
gladesh is unusually homogeneous for
such a populous country. As a result, villag-
ers can move around easily. It has several
competent charities, including one called
RDRS, which handed out the money in
Rangpur. The government does little to
curtail urban migration. Other countries
where Mr Mobarak is trying to launch sim-
ilar programmes may prove tougher. A trial
has begun in West Timor, in Indonesia.
After that, all going well, comes China. 7

Poverty and migration

On their bikes

D H A K A

One way to alleviate rural poverty is to
nudge people into cities
BESIDES shoes and shrimp, Bangladesh
exports poverty cures. Microﬁnance
was developed there in the late 1970s be-
fore spreading. In 2002 BRAC, a charity,
started giving assets such as cows (and
training in how to manage them) to desper-
ately poor women. That approach has
spread, too. The latest poverty remedy to
emerge from Bangladesh is diﬀerent: it tar-
gets men, and rather than trying to make
people more productive in their villages, it
encourages them to move. 
In Rangpur, a northern district, agricul-
tural labourers endure an annual hunger
in the autumn, known as monga. The rice
crop has been planted but is not ready to
harvest, so work is scarce. Jobs abound in
the cities, but poor farmers are loth to use
their dwindling savings on a bus ticket. It is
a good example of a poverty trap. 
So, for the past ten years, researchers led
by Mushﬁq Mobarak, an economist at Yale
University, have tried oﬀering cash to poor
households so long as somebody moves to
a city to look for work. The eﬀects of this in-
tervention have been measured through
randomised controlled trials, including a
large one, covering 133 villages, which be-
gan in 2014. They turn out to be strong. 
Predictably, money encourages move-
ment. In villages where no cash was of-
fered, 34% of poor households sent a mi-
grant to a city during monga. In those
where a few households were oﬀered
grants of 1,000 taka (about $12), 59% of
them sent someone to a city. But in villages
where most poor households were oﬀered
cash, fully 74% of those approached sent a

64 Finance and economics

The Economist Januar y 27th 2018

Free exchange

What could possibly go wrong?

Blame recurring ﬁnancial crises on the political temptations of deregulation
FOR a phenomenon with such predictably bad outcomes, a ﬁ-
nancial boom is strangely seductive. Not a decade after the
most serious ﬁnancial crisis since the Depression, the world
watches soaring markets with a mixture of serenity and glee. Nat-
ural impulses make ﬁnance a neck-snappingly volatile aﬀair.
Governments, though, deserve heaps of blame for policies that
amplify both boom and bust. As regulators begin picking apart
reforms only just enacted, it is worth asking why that is so.
Finance is hopelessly prone to wild cycles. When an economy
is purring, proﬁts go up, as do asset values. Rising asset prices ﬂat-
ter borrowers’ creditworthiness. When credit is easier to obtain,
spending goes up and the boom intensiﬁes. Eventually percep-
tions of risk shift, and tales of a “new normal” gain credence: new
technologies mean proﬁts can grow for ever, or ﬁnancial innova-
tion makes credit risk a thing of the past. But when the mood
turns, the feedback loop reverses direction. As asset prices fall,
banks grow stingier with their loans. Firms feel the pinch from
falling sales, get behind on their debts and sack workers, who get
behind on theirs. The desperate sell what they can, so asset prices
tumble, worsening the crash. Mania turns to panic.
The pattern is an ancient one. In their book “This Time is Dif-
ferent”, Carmen Reinhart and Kenneth Rogoﬀ, two economists,
point out that eight centuries of ﬁnancial pratfalls have not per-
suaded investors to treat ﬁnancial booms with the requisite cau-
tion. You might expect Joe Daytrader to succumb to the lure of ﬁ-
nancial excess, but the chronically poor response of governments
is more perplexing. Regulators could dampen frenzies by asking
banks to raise their equity-to-assets ratios or to tighten lending
standards. Regulation could be “countercyclical”, in other words,
leaning against the natural ﬁnancial cycle in order to limit excess,
prepare ﬁnancial institutions for bad times, and leave more room
for leniency when the economy is on the ropes. Governments
have got better at leaning against turns in the business cycle, so
that recessions are less common and less severe than they once
were. It seems strange that ﬁnance should be diﬀerent. 
Indeed, regulation is often “procyclical”: it adds fuel to the ﬁre.
In the decade up to the global ﬁnancial crisis America rolled back
Depression-era bank regulations, protected liberal trading rules
for derivatives, presided over a wave of banking-industry con-
solidation and tolerated a dangerous drop in mortgage-lending
standards. The ensuing crisis prompted a wave of new ﬁnancial

When the sun shines

US capital markets
S&P 500 stockmarket index

1941-43=10

National Financ ial Conditions Index*

Long-term average= 0

3,000

2,500

2,000

1,500

1,000

500

0

1998

2005

10

15 18

3

2

1

+

0

–

1

T
I

G
H

T
E
R

L

O
O

S
E
R

1998

2005

10

15 18

regulation, but these rules are now being weakened, even as exu-
berance returns. America’s Congress is expected to tweak the
Dodd-Frank Act in coming months to limit the application of
some rules to the largest banks. Republicans seem to lack the
votes to eliminate the new Consumer Financial Protection Bu-
reau, but President Donald Trump’s choice to run it, Mick Mulva-
ney, has long expressed a desire to neuter it. The Federal Reserve
is drafting plans to reduce bank-capital requirements. (Post-crisis
revisions to the Basel bank-capital standards for global banks en-
couraged regulators to set a countercyclical capital buﬀer, which
should rise with ﬁnancial excess; the Fed’s is currently set at zero.)
Not every element of the deregulatory push is reckless, and
America is tougher on some aspects of capital than others, but
the timing is poor—coming amid historically easy ﬁnancial condi-
tions and soaring asset prices (see chart).

Technical defaults
One reason is that regulators are, like everyone else, too eager to
conclude that this time is diﬀerent. Many proposed post-crisis re-
forms oﬀered technical solutions to the industry’s problems,
such as better measures of ﬁnancial instability or reforms to CEO
pay to improve bank behaviour (and reduce the need for robust
regulation). Yet in ﬁnance, as in much of economic policy, pro-
blems that look technical are in fact political. As Charles Calomi-
ris and Stephen Haber describe in their book “Fragile by Design”,
governments are not neutral observers of the ﬁnancial system;
they also depend on it, for their own ﬁnancing needs, among oth-
er things. This co-dependency means that the evolution of bank-
ing regulation is shaped by bargaining between bankers and poli-
ticians, not all of which aims to maximise social welfare.
In a new IMF working paper, Jihad Dagher examines the polit-
ical-economy elements of ten ﬁnancial crises, beginning with the
South Sea Bubble in Britain, and ﬁnds they had much in com-
mon. They were often preceded by periods in which light-touch
regulatory thinking was in the ascendant. Such an approach be-
comes less tarnished as memories of past crises recede, and open-
ing credit taps often brings short-run political rewards. As dereg-
ulation proceeds, politicians’ electoral hopes—and, sometimes,
their own ﬁnancial interests—rely on the burgeoning booms. So
they become more sympathetic to ﬁnancial interests. When Brit-
ain’s Parliament voted to protect the value of shares in the South
Sea Company, for example, many of its members owned some.
Crises are usually followed by a political backlash, which sweeps
in new leadership with a mandate to regulate. Warren Buﬀett’s
famous ﬁnancial axiom—that only when the tide recedes can you
see who has been swimming naked—also applies to politics. At
times of ﬁnancial excess, voters cannot easily tell responsible
leaders from reckless ones. Negligence becomes obvious only lat-
er. That makes recklessness an attractive political strategy. 
Is there any hope of escaping such cycles? Central-bank inde-
pendence helped depoliticise business-cycle management. Giv-
ing central banks more regulatory responsibility, as many coun-
tries did after the crisis, might therefore help (though it might also
encourage politicians to meddle more with central banks). Curb-
ing the power of the ﬁnancial industry might prove more eﬀec-
tive, but for now there is little political appetite for bold strategies
such as breaking up large banks. If this time is diﬀerent, it is only
because the lessons of history have been discarded so quickly. 7

Sources: Thomson Reuters; Federal Reser ve Bank of Chicago *Includes r isk, credit and leverage

Economist.com/blogs/freeexchange

Property

65

The Economist Januar y 27th 2018

66

Science and technology

The Economist Januar y 27th 2018

Also in this section
67 How cross-cultural is music?
68 Saving livers for transplants
69 Stopping sonic booms

Genomics

Sequencing the world

W a s h i n g t o n , D C

An ambitious eﬀort to map, store and disseminate genetic information about much
of life on Earth gets under way
IN NOVEMBER 2015, 23 of biology’s big-
wigs met up at the Smithsonian Institu-
tion, in Washington, DC, to plot a grandi-
ose scheme. It had been 12 years since the
publication of the complete genetic se-
quence of Homo sapiens. Other organisms’
genomes had been deciphered in the inter-
vening period but the projects doing so
had a piecemeal feel to them. Some were
predictable one-oﬀs, such as chickens,
honey bees and rice. Some were more am-
bitious, such as attempts to sample verte-
brate, insect and arachnid biodiversity by
looking at representatives of several thou-
sand genera within these groups, but were
advancing only slowly. What was needed,
the committee concluded, was a project
with the scale and sweep of the original
Human Genome Project. Its goal, they de-
cided, should be to gather DNA sequences
from specimens of all complex life on
Earth. They decided to call it the Earth Bio-
Genome Project (EBP).
At around the same time as this meet-
ing, a Peruvian entrepreneur living in São
Paulo, Brazil, was formulating an auda-
cious plan of his own. Juan Carlos Castilla
Rubio wanted to shift the economy of the
Amazon basin away from industries such
as mining, logging and ranching, and to-
wards one based on exploiting the region’s
living organisms and the biological infor-
mation they embody. At least twice in the

past—with the businesses of rubber-tree
plantations, and of blood-pressure drugs
called ACE inhibitors, which are derived
from snake venom—Amazonian organ-
isms have helped create industries worth
billions of dollars. Today’s explosion of
biological knowledge, Mr Castilla felt, por-
tended many more such opportunities.
For the shift he had in mind to happen,
though, he reasoned that both those who
live in the Amazon basin and those who
govern it would have to share in the proﬁts
of this putative new economy. And one
part of ensuring this happened would be
to devise a way to stop a repetition of what
occurred with rubber and ACE inhibitors—
namely, their appropriation by foreign
ﬁrms, without royalties or tax revenues ac-
cruing to the locals.
Such thinking is not unique to Mr Casti-
lla. An international agreement called the
Nagoya protocol already gives legal rights
to the country of origin of exploited biolog-
ical material. What is unique, or at least un-
usual, about Mr Castilla’s approach,
though, is that he also understands how
regulations intended to enforce such rights
can get in the way of the research needed
to turn knowledge into proﬁt. To that end
he has been putting his mind to the ques-
tion of how to create an open library of the
Amazon’s biological data (particularly
DNA sequences) in a way that can also

track who does what with those data, and
automatically distribute part of any com-
mercial value that results from such activi-
ties to the country of origin. He calls his
idea the Amazon Bank of Codes.
Now, under the auspices of the World
Economic Forum’s annual meeting at Da-
vos, a Swiss ski resort, these two ideas have
come together. On January 23rd it was an-
nounced that the EBP will help collect the
data to be stored in the code bank. The fo-
rum, for its part, will drum up support for
the venture among the world’s panjan-
drums—and with luck some dosh as well. 

Branching out
The EBP’s stated goal is to sequence, within
a decade, the genomes of all 1.5m known
species of eukaryotes. These are organisms
that have proper nuclei in their cells—
namely plants, animals, fungi and a range
of single-celled organisms called protists.
(It will leave it to others to sequence bacte-
ria and archaea, the groups of organisms
without proper nuclei.) The plan is to use
the ﬁrst three years to decipher, in detail,
the DNA of a member of each eukaryotic
family. Families are the taxonomic group
above the genus level (foxes, for example,
belong to the genus Vulpes in the family
Canidae) and the eukaryotes comprise
roughly 9,300 of them. The subsequent
three years would be devoted to creating
rougher sequences of one species from
each of the 150,000 or so eukaryotic gen-
era. The remaining species would be se-
quenced, in less detail still, over the ﬁnal
four years of the project. 
That is an ambitious timetable. The ﬁrst
part would require deciphering more than
eight genomes a day; the second almost
140; the third, about 1,000. For comparison,
the number of eukaryotic genomes se-

1

The Economist Januar y 27th 2018 

2 quenced so far is about 2,500. It is not,
though, the amount of sequencing in-
volved that is the daunting part of the task.
That
is simply a question of buying
enough sequencing machines and hiring
enough technicians to run them. Rather,
what is likely to slow things down is the
gathering of the samples to be sequenced.
For the sequencing, Harris Lewin, a ge-
nomicist at the University of California,
Davis, who was one of the EBP’s founding
spirits, estimates that extracting decent-
quality genetic data from a previously un-
examined species will require between
$40,000 and $60,000 for labour, reagents
and amortised machine costs. The high-
grade family-level part of the project will
thus clock in at about $500m. 
Big sequencing centres like BGI in Chi-
na, the Rockefeller University’s Genomic
Resource Centre in America, and the Sang-
er Institute in Britain, as well as a host of
smaller operations, are all eager for their
share of this pot. For the later, cruder, stages
of the project Complete Genomics, a Cali-
fornian startup bought by BGI, thinks it can
bring the cost of a rough-and-ready se-
quence down to $100. A hand-held se-
quencer made by Oxford Nanopore, a Brit-
ish company, may be able to match that
and also make the technology portable. 
The truly daunting part of the project is
the task of assembling the necessary speci-
mens. Some of them, perhaps 500,000
species, may come from botanical gardens,
zoos or places like the Smithsonian (the
herbarium of which boasts 5m items, rep-
resenting around 300,000 species). The
rest must be collected from the ﬁeld. Dr Le-
win hopes the project will spur innovation
in collection and processing. This could in-
volve technology both high (autonomous
drones) and low (enlisting legions of sam-
ple-hunting citizen scientists). It does,
though, sound like a multi-decade eﬀort.
It is also an eﬀort in danger of running
into the Nagoya protocol. Permission will
have to be sought from every government
whose territory is sampled. That will be a
bureaucratic nightmare. 
Indeed, 
John
Kress of the Smithsonian, another of the
EBP’s founders, says many previous se-
quencing ventures have foundered on the
rock of such permission. And that is why
those running the EBP are so keen to recruit
Mr Castilla and his code bank.

Banking on it
The idea of the code bank is to build a data-
base of biological information using a
blockchain. Though blockchains are best
known as the technology that underpins
bitcoin and other crypto-currencies, they
have other uses. In particular, they can be
employed to create “smart contracts” that
monitor and execute themselves. To ob-
tain access to Mr Castilla’s code bank
would mean entering into such a contract,
which would track how the knowledge

thus tapped was subsequently used. If
such use was commercial, a payment
would be transferred automatically to the
designated owners of the downloaded
data. Mr Castilla hopes for a proof-of-prin-
ciple demonstration of his platform to be
ready within a few months.
In theory, smart contracts of this sort
would give governments wary of bio-
piracy peace of mind, while also encourag-
ing people to experiment with the data.
And genomic data are, in Mr Castilla’s vi-
sion, just the start. He sees the Amazon
Bank of Codes eventually encompassing
all manner of biological compounds—
snake venoms of the sort used to create
ACE inhibitors, for example—or even be-
havioural characteristics like the conges-
tion-free movement of army-ant colonies,
which has inspired algorithms for co-ordi-
nating ﬂeets of self-driving cars. His even-
tual goal is to venture beyond the Amazon
itself, and combine his planned repository
with similar ones in other parts of the
world, creating an Earth Bank of Codes. 
Plenty needs to go right for this endeav-
our to succeed, concedes Dominic Waugh-
ray, who oversees public-private partner-
ships at the World Economic Forum. Those
working on diﬀerent species must agree
common genome-quality standards. Peo-
ple need to be enticed to study hitherto ne-
glected organisms. Countries which share
biological resources (the Amazon basin,
for example, is split between nine states)
should ideally co-operate on common re-
positories. And governments must resist
lobbying from vested interests in the ex-
tractive industries, keen to preserve access
to land, minerals or timber, which Mr Cas-
tilla’s scheme aims ultimately to curtail.
As to the money, that is the reason for
the announcement at Davos. By splashing
the tie-up between the EBP and the code
bank in front of many of the world’s richest
people, those behind the two enterprises
are not so discreetly waving their collect-
ing tins. The EBP has already been prom-
ised $100m of the $500m required for its
ﬁrst phase. The code bank, meanwhile, has
piqued the interest of the Brazilian and 
Peruvian governments.
For the participants, the rewards of suc-
cess would diﬀer. Dr Lewin, Dr Kress and
their compadres would, if the EBP suc-
ceeds, be able to use the evolutionary con-
nections between genomes to devise a de-
ﬁnitive version of the tree of eukaryotic
life. That would oﬀer biologists what the
periodic table oﬀers chemists, namely a
clear framework within which to operate.
Mr Castilla, for his part, would have rewrit-
ten the rules of international trade by
bringing the raw material of biotechnolo-
gy into an orderly pattern of ownership. If,
as many suspect, biology proves to be to fu-
ture industries what physics and chemis-
try have been to industries past, that
would be a feat of lasting value. 7

Science and technology 67

Ethnomusicology

Beyond Babel

Music may be the food of love, but
oddly, is not the language of it
“WHERE words fail, music speaks.”
Though these words, from the pen
of Hans Christian Andersen, are an ap-
pealing notion, the idea that there might be
universals in music which transcend cul-
tural boundaries has generally been met
with scepticism by scholars working in the
ﬁeld. That scepticism may, however, be un-
warranted, for research published in Cur-
rent Biology this week by Samuel Mehr and
Manvir Singh of Harvard University pro-
vides evidence that music does indeed per-
mit the communication of simple ideas be-
tween people even when they have no
language in common. 
To ascertain this, the two researchers re-
cruited 750 online volunteers from 60
countries. They played these volunteers 36
musical excerpts, each 14 seconds long, and
each drawn at random from one of 118
songs in a collection of the music of small-
scale societies around the world. Given the
broad range of cultures and languages rep-
resented in the collection, and the ethnic
diversity of the volunteers, Dr Mehr and
Mr Singh could be reasonably certain that
those listening were both unfamiliar with
the music and unable to understand the
lyrics in question.
After each excerpt had been played,
volunteers were asked what they thought
the song’s function was, and how sure
they were of that on a scale of one to six.
The possibilities oﬀered were: “for danc-

1

A lullaby in any language

68 Science and technology

2 ing”; “for soothing a baby”; “for healing ill-
ness”; “for expressing love for another”;
“for mourning the dead”; and “for telling a
story”. The ﬁrst four of these were real
functions, as stated by the people from
whom the song in question had been col-
lected. The last two were made up, and
were included as foils.
Dr Mehr and Mr Singh found that vol-
unteers’ perceptions of a song’s function
were generally in good agreement with its
actual function—with one exception.
Dance songs were particularly easy to
identify. They rated 2.18 points higher on
the certainty scale as being used “for danc-
ing” than lullabies did; 1.38 points higher
than love songs; and 1.09 points higher
than healing songs. Similarly, lullabies
were rated 1.53 points higher than dance
songs as being “to soothe a baby”, 1.42

points higher than healing songs and 1.19
points higher than love songs. 
Healing songs proved a bit more trou-
blesome. They scored only 0.47 and 0.31
points higher than dance and love songs
respectively for “to heal illness”, and were
statistically indistinguishable from lulla-
bies. The outlier, though, was love songs.
Listeners could distinguish them from
healing songs, but not from lullabies or
dance songs.
Why love songs were hard to identify is
unclear. Because such songs involve show-
ing oﬀ to the object of one’s aﬀections, they
may require more creativity, and thus gen-
erate more variety than lullabies or dance
songs. Perhaps the fact that both dancing
and cooing are involved in romance con-
fused listeners. This genre aside, however,
Andersen was clearly onto something. 7

Medicine

External organs

Livers for transplant can now be kept alive at body temperature
WHEN Constantin Coussios, a bio-
medical engineer at Oxford Universi-
ty, arrived one day in 2013 at the transplant
centre of King’s College Hospital, in Lon-
don, with a liver for their use, he triggered a
brief ﬂurry of panic. Two other livers had
arrived at the same time. The hospital had
only one operating theatre in which liver
transplants could be carried out—and be-
cause livers intended for transplant can be
kept in cold storage for no longer than 12
hours, the situation looked serious. 
What saved the day, and possibly a pa-
tient’s life, was that Dr Coussios was bring-
ing not a cold liver, stored on ice, but a
warm one. Instead of having had its me-
tabolism slowed, it was fully functional.
This was because it was connected to a
supply of blood and nutrients inside a spe-
cial box known as a metra (a Greek word
meaning “womb”), invented by Dr Cous-
sios and his colleague Peter Friend. The me-
tra even had a graphical interface to show,
moment by moment, how well its cargo
was faring. Dr Coussios told the surgeon to
transplant the cold-stored livers ﬁrst. The
one he had brought would keep. 
That was in the early days of metras.
Now, the devices are starting to spread. So
far 25 have been deployed around the
world and others are about to be. There are
also plans, by Dr Coussios and others, to
extend the idea behind the metra to the
preservation of other vital organs. If that
works, it would change the transplant
business by improving both the supply
and the health of such organs.

Now for a bit of metra-analysis

A metra is designed to keep the organ it
is nurturing supplied with the correct
amount of blood—an amount which va-
ries from one instant to the next. It detects
the organ’s demand for blood by monitor-
ing pressure in the arteries and veins going
into and out of the liver. It then adjusts the
power of its pump in response. 
The blood in question has been tin-
kered with to make it more eﬀective. It has
had its white cells and platelets removed to
avoid inﬂammation, clotting and the trans-
fer of disease. For the further prevention of
clotting, it has had anticoagulants added.
And it has been boosted with special
chemicals that the liver needs in order to

The Economist Januar y 27th 2018

produce bile; with insulin to regulate the
organ’s metabolism; and with nutrition in
the form of glucose and amino acids. 
Once a liver is hooked up inside a me-
tra, its health can be tracked by monitoring
things like blood ﬂow, bile production and
acidity levels. All these data permit a trans-
plant team to see how the organ is faring.
Moreover, a metra not only keeps a liver
healthy but can, in some circumstances, ac-
tually improve its health. Putting a liver
that has been cooled for storage into a me-
tra can reverse damage it has sustained
when cold by providing an environment
in which its natural propensity to rejuve-
nate can come to the fore. More remark-
ably, metras may even be able to recondi-
tion livers that are sickly because they
contain too much fat, and are thus untrans-
plantable. Once a liver has been removed
from the body that was making it fat, it will
recover surprisingly quickly. A mere two
days in a metra “liver spa” is enough to
have a palpable positive eﬀect on the
health of such an organ.
At the moment, this last beneﬁt is of
only theoretical value, because regulations
mean livers for transplant can be stored in
a metra for a maximum of 24 hours. That,
though, is twice the maximum a liver
ought to be kept chilled for transplant, and
almost three times the nine-hour limit gen-
erally preferred—hence Dr Coussios’s in-
souciance at the hospital back in 2013. Re-
search on metras suggests that the 24-hour
limit could safely be raised to three days,
and possibly longer than that. 
Twenty-four hours is, though, still long
enough to conduct tests on the quality of
livers that might otherwise be rejected. The
existing assessment of a liver for transplant
is necessarily subjective, because there is
no sure way to tell if a cooled organ will
work normally when it is warmed up and
reconnected. Many surgeons therefore err
on the side of caution, knowing that if they
put a defective liver into a patient, it will
probably kill him. 
All this means that using metras should
increase the availability of livers for trans-
plant. Dr Coussios reckons that reducing
the rate of rejection by surgeons could, by
itself, double the number which can be
used in Britain. Metras could also make it
easier to perform the tricky operation of
splitting livers in two, which is sometimes
done to create a child-sized organ while
still leaving enough over to transplant into
an adult. The use of a metra is likely to per-
mit these divisions to be carried out more
slowly and carefully.
The metra is being commercialised by
OrganOx, a ﬁrm based in Oxford. Dr Cous-
sios estimates that the world’s hospitals
have need for about 300 of the machines,
but the ﬁrm says it will have reliable repeat
business from furnishing the metras it has
sold with the disposable plastic connec-
tors that hook machine and organ up to-

1

The Economist Januar y 27th 2018 

Science and technology 69

boundary layer which, Mr Schlaerth says,
would act as a “pneumatic cushion” that
softened and impeded downward-propa-
gating shock waves. The aircraft’s long
nose, meanwhile, would be shaped to di-
rect its shock waves upwards and side-
ways. Waves from the engine inlets would
be directed upwards too, and put to good
use. Adding an appropriate downward
curve to a wing would trap the wave and
create an area of high pressure that would
give the wing additional lift.
To ﬁnd out whether all this would
work, Mr Schlaerth recruited two experts
in computational ﬂuid dynamics to act as
independent consultants. Tim Colonius of
the California Institute of Technology and
Luigi Martinelli of Princeton University
each carried out a series of tests. Using so-
phisticated computer modelling, one test
found that the shock wave from the wing
could be reduced by 63% at Mach 1.5, and
that a similar reduction would be expected
at Mach 2 (Concorde’s cruising speed). An-
other test showed that shock propagation
below the engine was virtually non-exis-
tent. Further analysis, Mr Schlaerth says,
indicates that
the overall shock wave
might be almost inaudible at ground level.
The next step is to replicate the comput-
er tests using models in a wind tunnel, a
task which the group hopes to take on later
this year. Mr Schlaerth and his business
partner, Mark Bryan, have founded a ﬁrm
called New Century Transportation and
Aeronautics Research to exploit the idea. If
all goes well, it could lead to an experimen-
tal aircraft to demonstrate the technology. 
Reducing sonic booms to an acceptable
level would allow overland ﬂights, which
should make the return of supersonic pas-
senger travel more plausible. Much would
depend on the cost of building and operat-
ing such aircraft. But the prospect of being
able to ﬂy from New York to Los Angeles in
less than two hours, instead of a tedious
six or so, would be welcomed by many a
weary traveller. 7

2

gether—for a replacement set of these is re-
quired with each new liver stored. 
In the future, OrganOx hopes to expand
its activities by building a metra for kid-
neys, and perhaps also one for pancreases.
Meanwhile, the ﬁrm has competition in
the form of TransMedics, of Andover, Mas-
sachusetts. This company is developing
similar devices for livers, hearts and lungs.
Besides increasing the supply of organs,

and improving patient outcomes, metras
and their competitors can also help ease
the psychological burden on surgeons.
One such, of some 30 years’ experience,
still admits to having sleepless nights after
performing a liver transplant. Even if he
has done the surgery perfectly, he cannot
be sure that the liver he has transplanted
will actually work. Metra-storage makes it
quite likely that it will. 7

Supersonic ﬂight

Boom boxed

A new idea for quietening sonic booms
WHEN a British Airways Concorde
travelling from New York touched
down at Heathrow airport, in London, on
October 24th 2003, supersonic passenger
travel came to an end. Concorde was a
technological marvel, but never a commer-
cial success. Only 14 of them entered ser-
vice. Yet the idea of building a successor
has never quite gone away. Aircraft-makers
review the idea from time to time. A num-
ber of groups are working on small execu-
tive jets intended to travel faster than the
speed of sound. The trouble is, something
else has also refused to go away: the shock
wave known as a sonic boom that ema-
nates from a supersonic aircraft.
That boom was one of Concorde’s fail-
ings. It rattled windows and frightened an-
imals, which meant the plane’s ﬂights over
land were restricted to subsonic speeds.
Throttling back an aircraft that is designed
to ﬂy fast is ineﬃcient and causes it to guz-
zle a lot of fuel. If supersonic air travel is
ever to return, Concorde’s successors will
thus have to quieten their act.
Several groups are trying to do this by
tweaking designs to take account of ad-
vances in aerodynamics. By 2021 NASA,
America’s aerospace agency, hopes to ﬂy a
small experimental supersonic plane ﬁtted
with some of these modiﬁcations, such as
a long, slender nose and engines blended
into the fuselage. The agency expects this
to reduce the sound of the shock wave to
what it describes as a “low boom”. But
John Schlaerth, an aerospace engineer
based in California, thinks he can take
such modiﬁcations much further. He and
his colleagues have ﬁled for a patent on a
set of designs which they believe might
eliminate the boom’s sound altogether at
ground level.
A sonic boom is the product of a series
of shock waves arising from various parts
of an aircraft—particularly its nose, wings
and engines—as it ﬂies faster than the
speed of sound (1,240kph, 770mph or

Mach 1, at sea level). Those waves are
caused because air molecules cannot get
out of the way fast enough during super-
sonic ﬂight, and thus build up in front of
these parts of the plane. The consequent
change 
in pressure 
then propagates
through the air and, when it reaches the
ground, is heard as a distinctive boom. 
Mr Schlaerth’s idea is to reﬂect and muf-
ﬂe the worst-oﬀending waves. He would
do this not by blending the engines into the
fuselage, but rather by placing them well
forward of the leading edge of the wing.
That could be done either by mounting
them on pylons extending from below the
wing, or by attaching them to the fuselage.
Both conﬁgurations would cause the en-
gines’ exhaust plumes to reﬂect any shock
wave forming in front of a wing up-
wards—ie, away from the ground. 
Further shock waves, caused by the ex-
haust’s counter-reﬂection downwards by
the wing’s wave, could be dealt with by
modifying the engine casings to create a
slower-moving stream of air below the
plume. This slower air should form a

Tomorrow, yesterday

70

Books and arts

Political thought

The problem with liberalism

Why Liberalism Failed. By Patr ick

Deneen. Yale University Press; 248 pages;
$30 and £30

How to revive the most successful idea of the past 400 years
OVER the past four centuries liberalism
has been so successful that it has dri-
ven all its opponents oﬀ the battleﬁeld.
Now it is disintegrating, destroyed by a mix
of hubris and internal contradictions, ac-
cording to Patrick Deneen, a professor of
politics at the University of Notre Dame.
The gathering wreckage of liberalism’s
twilight years can be seen all around, espe-
cially in America, Mr Deneen’s main focus.
The founding tenets of the faith have been
shattered. Equality of opportunity has pro-
duced a new meritocratic aristocracy that
has all the aloofness of the old aristocracy
with none of its sense of noblesse oblige.
Democracy has degenerated into a theatre
of the absurd. And technological advances
are reducing ever more areas of work into
meaningless drudgery. “The gap between
liberalism’s claims about itself and the
lived reality of the citizenry” is now so
wide that “the lie can no longer be accept-
ed,” Mr Deneen writes. What better proof
of this than the vision of 1,000 private
planes whisking their occupants to Davos
to discuss the question of “creating a
shared future in a fragmented world”?
Mr Deneen uses the term “liberalism”
in its philosophical rather than its popular
sense. He is describing the great tradition
of political theory that is commonly traced
to Thomas Hobbes and John Locke rather
than the set of vaguely leftish attitudes that
Americans now associate with the word.
But this is no work of philosophical cud-

chewing. Most political theorists argue
that liberalism has divided into two inde-
pendent
streams: classical 
liberalism,
which celebrates the free market, and left-
liberalism which celebrates civil rights. For
Mr Deneen they have an underlying unity.
Most political observers think that the de-
bate about the state of liberalism has noth-
ing to do with them. Mr Deneen argues
that liberalism is a ruling philosophy, dic-
tating everything from court decisions to
corporate behaviour. Theory is practice. 
The underlying unity lies in individual
self-expression. Both classical and left lib-
erals conceive of humans as rights-bearing
individuals who should be given as much
space as possible to fulﬁl their dreams. The
aim of government is to secure rights. The
legitimacy of the system is based on a
shared belief in a “social contract” be-
tween consenting adults. But this produces
a paradox. Because the liberal spirit me-
chanically destroys inherited customs and
local traditions, sometimes in the name of
market eﬃciency and sometimes in the
name of individual rights, it creates more
room for the expansion of the state, as mar-
ketmaker and law-enforcer. The perfect ex-
pression of modern liberalism is provided
by the frontispiece of Hobbes’s “Levia-

The Economist Januar y 27th 2018

Also in this section
71 How democracies die
72 Swear ing is good for you
73 A memoir of the second world war
73 John Ashber y, Amer ican poet

For daily analysis and debate on books, ar ts and
culture, visit
Economist.com/culture

than” (detail pictured), with its sketch of
thousands of atomised individuals con-
fronted by an all-powerful sovereign. 
Mr Deneen makes his case well, though
he sometimes mistakes repetition for per-
suasion. He reminds the reader that, before
the advent of modern liberalism, philoso-
phers identiﬁed liberty with self-mastery
rather than self-expression, with the con-
quest of hedonistic desires rather than
their indulgence. He does an impressive
job of capturing the current mood of disil-
lusionment, echoing left-wing complaints
about rampant commercialism, right-wing
complaints about narcissistic and bullying
students, and general worries about ato-
misation and selﬁshness. But when he
concludes that all this adds up to a failure
of liberalism, is his argument convincing? 
His book has two fatal ﬂaws. The ﬁrst
lies in his deﬁnition of liberalism. J.H. Hex-
ter, an American academic, believed his
fellow historians could be divided into
two camps: “splitters” (who were forever
making distinctions) and “lumpers” (who
make sweeping generalisations by lump-
ing things together). Mr Deneen is an ex-
treme lumper. He argues that the essence
of liberalism lies in freeing individuals
from constraints. 
In fact, liberalism contains a wide range
of intellectual traditions which provide dif-
ferent answers to the question of how to
trade oﬀ the relative claims of rights and re-
sponsibilities, individual expression and
social ties. Even classical liberals who were
most insistent on removing constraints on
individual freedom agonised about atomi-
sation. The mid-Victorians were great insti-
tution-builders, creating everything from
voluntary organisations
to 
joint-stock
companies (“little republics” in the phrase
of Robert Lowe, a 19th-century British
statesman) that were designed to ﬁll the
space between the state and society. Later 

1

The Economist Januar y 27th 2018 

2 liberals experimented with a range of
ideas from devolving power from the cen-
tre to creating national education systems. 
Mr Deneen’s ﬁxation on the essence of
liberalism leads to the second big problem
of his book: his failure to recognise liberal-
ism’s ability to reform itself and address its
internal problems. The late 19th century
saw America suﬀering from many of the
problems that are reappearing today, in-
cluding the creation of a business aristocra-
cy, the rise of vast companies, the corrup-
tion of politics and the sense that society
was dividing into winners and losers. But a
wide variety of reformers, working within
the liberal tradition, tackled these pro-
blems head on. Theodore Roosevelt took
on the trusts. Progressives cleaned up gov-
ernment corruption. University reformers
modernised academic syllabuses and
built ladders of opportunity. Rather than
dying, liberalism reformed itself. 
Mr Deneen is right to point out that the
record of liberalism in recent years has
been dismal. He is also right to assert that
the world has much to learn from the pre-
modern notions of liberty as self-mastery
and self-denial. The biggest enemy of liber-
alism is not so much atomisation but old-
fashioned greed, as members of the Davos
elite pile their plates ever higher with perks
and share options. But he is wrong to argue
that the only way for people to liberate
themselves from the contradictions of lib-
eralism is “liberation from liberalism it-
self”. The best way to read “Why Liberal-
ism Failed” is not as a funeral oration but as
a call to action: up your game, or else. 7

Democracy

The Trump train

Trumpocracy: The Corruption of the

Amer ican Republic. By David Frum. Harper;
320 pages; $25.99. To be published in Br itain
in Februar y; £20

How Democracies Die: What Histor y Tells
Us About Our Future. By Steven Levitsky

and Daniel Ziblatt. Crown; 265 pages; $26.
Viking; £16.99
FRENCH railway crossings bear warning
signs that writers of books about Do-
nald Trump should heed. “One Train Can
Hide Another” their neat enamel plaques
declare. The risks of Trump-distraction are
great, because the 45th president is such a
spectacle—a tooting, puﬃng, brass-and-
steam-whistle commotion liable to draw
all gazes, all the time. But a narrow focus on
the man risks a potentially grave mistake:
paying too little attention to large, slow-
rolling yet remorseless political forces that

Books and arts 71

But does he love what it stands for?

were in motion long before Mr Trump
chugged into view.
Two new books about the president ﬂirt
with just such an accident. For they share
the same distracting aim: to prove that Mr
Trump has already shown himself to be a
proto-despot.
The ﬁrst, “Trumpocracy” by David
Frum, devotes long pages to cataloguing
alarming, deceitful and plain unseemly
acts and statements by Mr Trump, his cro-
nies and enablers. Mr Frum, a centrist con-
servative who worked as a White House
speechwriter for President George W. Bush,
has a crisp way with words. “A rule-of-law
state can withstand a certain amount of of-
ﬁcial corruption. What it cannot withstand
is a culture of impunity,” he observes at
one point, as he reminds readers that Mr
Trump is the ﬁrst president since Gerald
Ford not to release his tax returns in full,
and the ﬁrst ever to merge political and
business interests so unblushingly. The
clear prose style is just as well, for “Trum-
pocracy”, which draws heavily on quotes
from published news reports, can resem-
ble a ﬁrst draft of articles of impeachment.
Grander, more didactic ambitions un-
derpin a second book, “How Democracies
Die”, by two Harvard professors, Steven 
Levitsky and Daniel Ziblatt. The pair are 
experts on populism, demagoguery and
autocracy, notably in Europe and Latin
America in the 19th and 20th centuries.
Their aim is to warn Americans, in particu-
lar, that their republic—for all its vaunted
checks and balances—is not immune to the
pathologies which, over the years, have 
infected and diseased other democracies. 
Like Mr Frum, the professors correctly
stress the importance of unwritten norms
that buttress the formal protections that
are set out in America’s constitution and 
legal codes. Independent courts and agen-

cies like the FBI have done much to defend
the rule of law, they note. But a surprisingly
thin “tissue of convention”, according to
Aziz Huq and Tom Ginsburg, two constitu-
tional scholars Mr Frum quotes, together
with the courage of political leaders and
members of Congress, are all that stand in
the way of a bad president who is deter-
mined to pack courts with loyal judges, or
to appoint crooks to run nominally inde-
pendent agencies.
Mr Levitsky and Mr Ziblatt go beyond
anxious scanning for danger. They declare
that, on the evidence, Mr Trump has prob-
ably crossed the line from rough-around-
the-edges populist to would-be strong-
man. Mr Frum considers what is already
known about Russian meddling in the
election of 2016, and bluntly concludes: “A
president beholden to Russia had been 
installed in the Oval Oﬃce.” 
The professors take a more scholarly
approach. They oﬀer a neat table, setting
out “Four Key Indicators of Authoritarian
Behaviour” to help readers decide wheth-
er Mr Trump is an autocrat. The table is
enough to make Trump-sceptics leap from
their armchairs in happy vindication. Un-
der the ﬁrst heading, “Rejection of (or weak
commitment to) democratic rules of the
game”, readers ﬁnd not just blatant dicta-
tor-conduct (backing military coups, can-
celling elections) but a more subtle last test,
“Do they attempt to undermine the legiti-
macy of elections, for example, by refusing
to accept credible electoral results?” Mr
Trump has repeatedly and falsely suggest-
ed that he would have beaten Hillary Clin-
ton in a landslide, had millions not illegally
voted. Then there are Mr Trump’s attacks
on the press, and his snarling promises to
tighten libel laws against what he calls
“fake news”. Such statements trigger the
professors’ fourth indicator: “Readiness to 

1

Profane language

Foul play

Swear ing Is Good for You. By Emma Byrne.

W.W. Nor ton; 240 pages; $25.95. Proﬁle
Books; £12.99
IN THESE potty-mouthed times, when
certain world leaders sling profanity
about with abandon, many observers nat-
urally lament the debasement of speech.
But instead of clutching pearls, why not
ﬁnd a silver lining? Learning more about
when, how and why people swear oﬀers
insight into everything from the human
brain to a society’s taboos. Trash talking
even aﬀords some real physical and social
beneﬁts, as Emma Byrne argues in “Swear-
ing Is Good for You”. 
For all their shock value, swear words
are practical and elastic, capable of threat-
ening aggression or coaxing a laugh.
Among peers, profane banter is often a
sign of trust—a way of showing solidarity
with a larger group. Critics may say such
language reveals boorish thinking or a lim-
ited vocabulary, but swearing is often im-
pressively strategic, and a ﬂuency in crass
language typically correlates with verbal
ﬂuency in general.
Because the language learnt in infancy

72 Books and arts

2 curtail civil liberties of opponents, includ-
ing media”.
Alas, these catalogues and checklists
are more emotionally satisfying for Trump
opponents (see, he is a tyrant, they can ex-
claim) than genuinely illuminating. Mr
Trump says horrible, shameful things all
too frequently. But he has not actually
locked up opponents or sent thugs to
smash printing presses. That makes for a
puzzle. Is the president an autocrat, or does
he just play one on TV? The puzzle is not
solved by crafting pseudoscientiﬁc tests for
autocracy that give equal weight to harsh
words and malign acts.
Both books are at their strongest when
examining how Mr Trump ﬂouts norms
with impunity. Both ascribe the presi-
dent’s success to the similar insight that
modern politics resembles a form of tribal
warfare. What a leader does matters less
than whom he is for, and above all, whom
he is against.
For much of the 20th century, the pro-
fessors write, politics worked because
most practitioners subscribed to two vital
norms. First, mutual tolerance, or the un-
derstanding that competing parties accept
one another as legitimate. Second, forbear-
ance, or the idea that election-winners ex-
ercise some restraint when wielding pow-
er, rather than treating politics like war.
Not Mr Trump. Mr Frum describes the
president in near-animal terms, as sniﬃng
out his opponents’ weaknesses—“low en-
ergy”, “little”, “crooked”—in the same way
that he instinctively sensed the weak point
in modern politics: “that Americans resent
each other’s diﬀerences more than they
cherish their shared democracy”.
Neither book ﬂinches from tracing the
role that race, class, education and culture
play in what are ostensibly political argu-
ments. Mr Levitsky and Mr Ziblatt oﬀer the
troubling thought that the norms of civility
and compromise seen in Washington be-
tween the end of Reconstruction and the
1980s rested, uncomfortably, on racial ex-
clusion. Southern whites did such an eﬀec-
tive job of disenfranchising freed slaves
soon after the civil war that black turnout
in South Carolina plunged from 96% in
1876 to 11% in 1898, as voting curbs bit. As a
result, many southern states endured what
amounted to decades of authoritarian sin-
gle-party rule. As the professors bluntly
put it: “It was only after 1965 that the United
States fully democratised.” The parties
have been sorting themselves along racial
and class lines ever since.
Neither book blames all American ills
on racism—they are more nuanced than
that. But the authors of both do argue, in 
eﬀect, that America has never tried to
maintain democratic norms in a demos as
diverse as today’s. Unless that can be ﬁxed,
it is a grave threat to the republic. Keep it in
sight, even as the Trump Express ﬂashes
dangerously past. 7

The Economist Januar y 27th 2018

has the greatest emotional resonance,
swearing in your mother tongue always
feels most powerful, even among the most
ﬂuent multilinguals. As swearing func-
tions as a complex signal, subtle enough ei-
ther to amuse or to oﬀend, these words
vary according to what a culture deems un-
mentionable. Russian, for example, “has
an almost inﬁnite number” of ways to
swear, most of them involving the honour
of your mother. As for Japanese, because
the culture is largely free of an excretory ta-
boo (hence the poo emoji), there is no
equivalent of “shit”. Yet the word kichigai
(loosely translated as “retard”) is usually
bleeped on television. Translators often
struggle to render curse words and insults
in other languages, as their emotional heft
tends to be culturally circumscribed. For
example, Westerners were more amused
than alarmed by reports of an Iraqi minis-
ter declaring “A curse be upon your mous-
tache!” to a Kuwaiti diplomat in 2003. 
Women who curse face a double stan-
dard. Although swearing in a male-domin-
ated profession can be a short cut to accep-
tance, women are also more likely to be
shunned or seen as untrustworthy—even
by women—when they sound like steve-
dores. This is not only because women are
expected to be more polite than men, Ms
Byrne suggests, but also because swearing
tends to be associated with sexuality. Since
women are judged more harshly than men
for their sexual adventures, bad language
leads to assumptions of bad behaviour.
Stoicism in the face of pain may seem
noble, but swearing a blue streak is appar-
ently more helpful. A study of volunteers
forced to plunge their hands in ice-cold wa-
ter found that those who swore kept their
hands submerged for longer than those
who were stuck bellowing a neutral word.
By making people feel more aggressive—
and therefore, perhaps, more powerful—
swearing seems to improve the tolerance
of pain.
A self-described swearing evangelist,
Ms Byrne is certainly bullish on the merits
of bad words. But in her eagerness to prove
how “fucking useful” they are, she some-
times overplays her hand. She argues that
swearing makes people less likely to be
physically violent, but oﬀers little evidence
to back this up. She commends the way
piss-taking can help people work together
more eﬀectively, but largely overlooks the
way this approach can alienate minorities.
She also occasionally trades empiricism
for hyperbole, as when she declares: “I
don’t think we would have made it as the
world’s most populous primate if we
hadn’t learned to swear.”
Still, “Swearing Is Good for You” is an
entertaining and often enlightening book.
It may not quite stand up the bold claim of
its title, but Ms Byrne’s readers are sure to
come away with a fresh appreciation of
language at its most foul. 7

The Economist Januar y 27th 2018 

Books and arts 73

with impermanence. His ideas are at
once both inscrutable and sublime. He
once said his poems aim to capture “the
experience of experience”. Searching
high and low through the English lan-
guage, he appears to have lifted stone
after stone until there was nothing left
hidden. As Ashbery was originally from
Rochester, New York, home to Kodak and
Xerox, he was certainly no stranger to
representations of representations. “Girls
on the Run”, in particular, was inspired
by Henry Darger, an artist who used
photocopies and collage to make compo-
sitions just as Ashbery, also an accom-
plished collagist, did with language, as
this brief passage so memorably shows: 

The oblique ﬂute sounded its note of resin.
In time, he said, we all go under the ﬂuted
covers
of this great world, with its spiral dis-
sonances,
and then we can see, on the other side,
what the rascals are up to.

Amer ican poetr y

Wordsmithing

John Ashber y: Collected Poems 1991–2000.

The Librar y of Amer ica; 838 pages; $45
THE ﬁrst living poet to have his work
published by the Library of America
was John Ashbery, and this is the second
volume of his collected poems. He died
last September, about a month after he
turned 90. So this book serves as a dual
celebration, memorialising his sprawling
life and his many accomplishments. 
The inaugural volume appeared in
2008, and it contains his ﬁrst 12 books of
poetry. This second volume compiles the
seven collections—including Ashbery’s
two book-length poems from the 1990s,
“Flow Chart” and “Girls on the Run”. Like
the ﬁrst book, it brings together a wealth
of uncollected poems that answer the
inevitable question of what a B-side
Ashbery poem might look like. Even in
the minor poems in his collections, the
stamp of his voice is always present.
In the 1990s the constellation of work,
as well as the variety of form and in-
vention of Ashbery’s art, shifted and
grew exponentially to release more and
more energy in his writing. “Flow Chart”
introduced that new epoch, and lines
from it begin this new volume:

Still in the published city but not yet
overtaken by a new form of despair, I ask
the diagram: is it the foretaste of pain
it might easily be? Or an emptiness
so sudden it leaves the girders
whanging in the absence of wind,
the sky milk-blue and astringent? We know
life is so busy, 
but a larger activity shrouds it, and this is
something
we can never feel, except occasionally, in
small signs
put up to warn us and as soon expunged, in
part
or wholly.

Ashbery’s poems carry Western thought
to such an extreme that it almost begins
to appear Eastern in its preoccupation

Histor y will be a kind judge

wits and later on the comfort of strangers,
Frenkel moved from one refuge to another.
She relates the challenge of obtaining a res-
idence permit and the injustice of arrest.
She evokes the agony of being cut oﬀ from
family and friends and the horror of Nazi
clampdowns and roundups. Tension
mounts when she is hunted and faces de-
portation, leaving her no alternative but to
plan a desperate escape across the border.
A preface by Patrick Modiano, a Nobel
prize-winning author, and a 30-page dos-

sier add further context. However, Fren-
kel’s story can be read without these props.
It stands as both an illuminating depiction
of wartime France and a gripping and af-
fecting personal account of endurance and
deﬁance. Frenkel writes candidly through-
out about her fears and ordeals (at one
point even considering taking “the ulti-
mate way out”), but she soldiers on, refus-
ing to be beaten. Whether she is evacuee or
refugee, fugitive or captive, the reader roots
for her every step of the way. 7

Memoirs of the second world war

Indomitable spirit

No Place to Lay One’s Head. By Françoise

Frenkel. Translated by Stephanie Smee.
Pushkin Press; 299 pages; £16.99
IN 1921 Françoise Frenkel, a young Polish
woman of Jewish faith, opened the ﬁrst
French-language bookshop in Berlin. She
described it as a “calling”. A friend termed
it a “crusade”. The venture drew authors,
artists, diplomats and celebrities. For
many at the beginning, the bookshop was
a vibrant hub for the exchange of ideas. For
others during the darker years of eroded
liberties and stiﬂed thought, it became a
haven, a place to rest the mind and breathe
easy. In July 1939 Frenkel ﬁnally realised
that, whereas blacklisted authors and con-
ﬁscated newspapers once jeopardised her
livelihood, escalating persecution and 
violence now threatened her life. 
Frenkel shut up shop, ﬂed the country
and spent four years in occupied France.
Miraculously she lived to tell her tale. “No
Place to Lay One’s Head” was written and
published when Frenkel was in exile in
Switzerland. It then disappeared for de-
cades, resurfacing only in 2010 in a ﬂea
market, after which it was republished in
French. Frenkel died in Nice in 1975. This is
the ﬁrst time her memoir has been translat-
ed into English.
The book’s opening chapter touches on
Frenkel’s book-ﬁlled childhood and her
studies in Paris, before covering the highs
and lows of the bookshop years. The re-
mainder—indeed the majority—of the nar-
rative is devoted to her struggle for survival
in the south of France. Relying ﬁrst on her

74

Courses

The Economist Januar y 27th 2018

Appointments

Tenders

75

The Mossavar-Rahmani Center for Business and 
Government at Harvard Kennedy School invites 
distinguished professionals with at least 20 years of 
experience in government and/or business to apply 
for a one-year, unpaid appointment as Senior Fellow 
to conduct research on topics at the intersection of 
the public and private sectors, including regulation, 
corporate governance, and the role of government in 
the changing global economy. The Center is led by 
Lawrence Summers, University Professor, and has 
numerous Harvard faculty as members.

Deadline for applications is March 1, 2018.

For more information
please visit

www.hks.harvard.edu/centers/mrcbg/about/program-description

Fellowships

INDIAN INSTITUTE OF MANAGEMENT KOZHIKODE
Inviting Visiting Fellows 

Indian Institute of Management Kozhikode (IIMK) is the fi fth IIM established in 1996 by the 
Government of India.  Located at the historic city of Kozhikode in the State of Kerala, it is 
bestowed with a lush picturesque and oxygen-rich campus with own sustainable water 
harvesting system. 
To encourage collaborative research between scholars of international repute and its faculty 
members, the Institute invites applications for Visiting Fellows in various Management 
domains. The duration of the fellowship is for a maximum of 3 months. It includes a monthly 
fellowship of Indian Rupees (INR) 132500, return economy class airfare and rent free 
accommodation on campus.
Applicants should be tenured Associate Professors/Professors from premier institutions 
abroad and should have track record of consistently excellent research. 

Deadline for application is March 15, 2018
Full details of the position and how to apply: https://iimk.ac.in/visiting-fellow.pdf

To advertise within the classified section, contact:

UK/Europe
Agne Zurauskaite
Tel: +44 20 7576 8152 
agnezurauskaite@economist.com

United States
Richard Dexter
Tel: +1 212 554 0662 
richarddexter@economist.com

Asia
Shan Shan Teo
Tel: +65 6428 2673 
shanshanteo@economist.com

Middle East & Africa
Philip Wrigley
Tel: +44 20 7576 8091 
philipwrigley@economist.com

The Economist Januar y 27th 2018

GHANA GRID COMPANY LIMITED

TENDER FOR THE SUPPLY OF OPGW AND 
COMMUNICATION MAINTENANCE 
MATERIALS AND EQUIPMENT
INTERNATIONAL COMPETITIVE TENDERING

The Ghana Grid Company Limited (GRIDCo) of the Republic of Ghana 
invites sealed tenders for the supply of OPGW and Communication 
Maintenance Materials and Equipment.

Details of the tender are as follows:

PACKAGE/
TENDER NUMBER

CONTRACT 
NAME

TENDER 
SALE 
PERIOD

TENDER 
PRICE

TENDER 
CLOSING 
DATE

BID No. 
GR/GGCL/
GD/0021/2017

Supply Of 
OPGW and 
Communication 
Maintenance 
Materials And 
Equipment

January 22, 
2018 to 
March 7, 
2018

USD 
200.00

March 7, 
2018

1. Detailed specifi cations of the items are provided in the tender 
documents.
2. Tendering is open to eligible private, public or government-owned 
legal entities.
3. Tendering documents in English may be purchased from the 
FINANCE DEPARTMENT (PROCUREMENT SECTION), GHANA 
GRID COMPANY LIMITED, LOCATED TWO (2) KILOMETERS OFF 
TEMA MOTORWAY ROUNDABOUT TO AFLAO ROAD. (CLOSE TO 
TEMA STEEL WORKS) upon the payment of a non-refundable fee of 
USD 200.00 or its equivalent in Ghana Cedis. The method of payment 
will be by cash.
4. Tenders would be on sale between 0900 hrs to 1500 hrs (local time) 
each working day specifi ed for the bid above.
5. Tenderers shall submit with each Tender, a Tender Security in United 
States Dollars as stated in the tendering document or its equivalent in 
Ghana Cedis.
6. Completed tenders must be addressed to:

THE DIRECTOR FINANCE,
GHANA GRID COMPANY LIMITED,
P. O. BOX CS 7979, 
TEMA

and delivered to the PROCUREMENT CONFERENCE ROOM, 
GRIDCo HEAD OFFICE, GHANA GRID COMPANY LIMITED, 
LOCATED 2 KILOMETERS OFF TEMA MOTORWAY ROUNDABOUT 
TO AFLAO ROAD, (CLOSE TO THE TEMA STEEL WORKS) by 
10:00 Hrs GMT on the closing date stated above and in the tendering 
document.

Interested tenderers may also obtain information from the address 
above and on:
Telephone Nos.:  +233-303-318700, +233-303-304818,
Fax:  +233-303-318727,
Email: gridcoprocurement@gridcogh.com

7. Tenderers may, if they so wish, be present at the public opening of the 
tenders which would be held at the PROCUREMENT CONFERENCE 
ROOM, GRIDCo HEAD OFFICE, GHANA GRID COMPANY 
LIMITED, LOCATED 2 KILOMETERS OFF TEMA MOTORWAY 
ROUNDABOUT TO AFLAO ROAD, (CLOSE TO THE TEMA STEEL 
WORKS) immediately after the close of tenders on the date stated 
above and in the tendering document.

 
 
   
76

Economic and ﬁnancial indicators

The Economist Januar y 27th 2018

Economic data

Gross domestic product 

Industr ial 
production 

Consumer pr ices Unemployment 
rate, % 

Current-account balance 

Statistics on 42 economies, plus a closer look at the world’s r ichest
football clubs

Economic data

% change on year ago

latest 

+6.8 Q4 
+2.1 Q3 
+1.7 Q3 
+3.0 Q3 
+2.8 Q3 
+3.2 Q3 
+1.7 Q3 
+2.3 Q3 
+2.8 Q3 
+1.3 Q3 
+1.7 Q3 
+3.0 Q3 
+3.1 Q3 

United States +2.3 Q3 
China 
Japan 
Br itain 
Canada 
Euro area 
Austr ia 
Belgium 
France 
Germany 
Greece 
Italy 
Netherlands 
Spain 
Czech Republic +4.7 Q3 
Denmark 
Norway 
Poland 
Russia 
Sweden  
Switzerland 
Turkey 
Australia 
Hong Kong 
India 
Indonesia 
Malaysia 
Pakistan 
Philippines 
Singapore 
South Korea 
Taiwan 
Thailand 
Argentina 
Brazil 
Chile 
Colombia 
Mexico 
Peru 
Egypt 
Israel 
Saudi Arabia 
South Afr ica 

+1.4 Q3 
+3.2 Q3 
+5.1 Q3 
+1.8 Q3 
+2.9 Q3 
+1.2 Q3 
+11.1 Q3 
+2.8 Q3 
+3.6 Q3 
+6.3 Q3 
+5.1 Q3 
+6.2 Q3 

+6.6 Q4 
+3.1 Q4 
+3.0 Q4 
+3.1 Q3 
+4.3 Q3 
+4.2 Q3 
+1.4 Q3 
+2.2 Q3 
+2.0 Q3 
+1.5 Q3 
+2.5 Q3 
na  
+1.9 Q3 
-0.7 2017 
+0.8 Q3 

+5.7 2017** 

qtr* 2017† 
+3.2 +2.3 
+6.6 +6.8 
+2.5 
+1.7 
+1.6 
+1.6 
+1.7 
+3.1 
+2.9 +2.3 
+1.4 +2.8 
+1.0 
+1.7 
+2.3 
+1.8 
+3.3 +2.5 
+1.2 
+1.3 
+1.4 
+1.5 
+1.6 +3.2 
+3.1 
+3.1 
+1.9 +4.5 
-1.9 +2.2 
+3.0 
+2.1 
+4.9 +4.6 
na 
+1.8 
+3.1 +2.7 
+2.5 +0.9 
na +6.3 
+2.4 +2.3 
+2.0 +3.7 
+8.7 +6.6 
na 
+5.1 
na +5.8 
na +5.7 
+6.1 +6.6 
+2.8 +3.5 
-0.9 
+3.1 
+6.8 +2.4 
+4.0 +3.6 
+3.6 +2.9 
+0.6 +0.9 
+6.0 
+1.4 
+3.2 
+1.6 
-1.2 +2.0 
+5.5 +2.7 
na +4.2 
+3.5 +3.6 
na 
-0.8 
+2.0 +0.8 

latest 
latest 
2017† 
+3.6 Dec 
+2.1 Dec 
+2.1 
+6.2 Dec 
+1.8 Dec 
+1.6 
+3.6 Nov 
+0.5 Nov 
+0.5 
+2.5 Nov 
+3.0 Dec 
+2.7 
+4.6 Oct 
+2.1 Nov 
+1.5 
+3.2 Nov 
+1.4 Dec 
+1.5 
+4.4 Oct 
+2.2 Dec 
+2.1 
+6.7 Oct 
+2.1 Dec 
+2.2 
+2.5 Nov 
+1.2 Dec 
+1.2 
+5.7 Nov 
+1.7 Dec 
+1.7 
+0.9 Nov 
+0.7 Dec 
+1.1 
+2.2 Nov 
+0.9 Dec 
+1.3 
+4.4 Nov 
+1.3 Dec 
+1.3 
+4.7 Nov 
+1.1 Dec 
+2.1 
+8.5 Nov 
+2.4 Dec 
+2.5 
-1.1 Nov 
+1.0 Dec 
+1.1 
-4.1 Nov 
+1.6 Dec 
+1.9 
+2.7 Dec 
+2.1 Dec 
+2.0 
-1.6 Dec 
+2.5 Dec 
+3.7 
+6.5 Nov 
+1.7 Dec 
+1.9 
+8.7 Q3 
+0.8 Dec 
+0.5 
+6.9 Nov +11.9 Dec 
+11.0 
+3.5 Q3 
+1.8 Q3 
+2.0 
+0.4 Q3 
+1.7 Dec 
+1.5 
+8.4 Nov 
+5.2 Dec 
+3.5 
+5.0 Nov 
+3.6 Dec 
+3.8 
+5.0 Nov 
+3.5 Dec 
+3.9 
-2.0 Nov 
+4.6 Dec 
+4.1 
-8.1 Nov 
+3.3 Dec 
+3.2 
+5.3 Nov 
+0.4 Dec 
+0.6 
-1.6 Nov 
+1.5 Dec 
+2.0 
+1.2 Dec 
+1.2 Dec 
+0.6 
+4.2 Nov 
+0.8 Dec 
+0.7 
+0.8 Nov +25.0 Dec +25.2 
+4.7 Nov 
+2.9 Dec 
+3.4 
+2.3 Nov 
+2.3 Dec 
+2.2 
+0.3 Nov 
+4.1 Dec 
+4.3 
-1.5 Nov 
+6.8 Dec 
+6.0 
-2.5 Sep 
+1.4 Dec 
+2.8 
+27.1 Nov +21.9 Dec +26.8 
+1.6 Nov 
+0.4 Dec 
+0.3 
na  
+0.4 Dec 
-0.3 
+2.1 Nov 
+4.7 Dec 
+5.4 

latest 12 
months, $bn 
-452.5 Q3 
+121.6 Q3 
+198.0 Nov 
-118.1 Q3 
-45.8 Q3 
+438.7 Nov 
+8.5 Q3 
-3.9 Sep 
-28.7 Nov 
+282.8 Nov 
-1.0 Nov 
+56.1 Nov 
+80.7 Q3 
+23.0 Oct 
+0.9 Q3 
+26.2 Nov 
+21.1 Q3 
+1.5 Nov 
+40.2 Q4 
+21.1 Q3 
+66.4 Q3 
-43.8 Nov 
-22.2 Q3 
+14.8 Q3 
-33.6 Q3 
-13.3 Q3 
+9.2 Q3 
-15.2 Q4 
-0.5 Sep 
+57.4 Q3 
+81.3 Nov 
+74.1 Q3 
+47.4 Q3 
-26.6 Q3 
-11.3 Nov 
-4.6 Q3 
-11.1 Q3 
-16.1 Q3 
-1.8 Q3 
-12.2 Q3 
+10.5 Q3 
+12.4 Q3 
-7.3 Q3 

% of GDP 
2017† 
-2.4 
+1.2 
+4.0 
-4.5 
-3.0 
+3.2 
+2.1 
-0.3 
-1.4 
+7.9 
-0.5 
+2.7 
+9.6 
+1.7 
+0.7 
+8.4 
+4.9 
+0.1 
+2.5 
+4.5 
+9.6 
-5.0 
-1.7 
+6.1 
-1.5 
-1.6 
+2.6 
-4.9 
-0.2 
+18.5 
+5.5 
+13.2 
+11.7 
-4.1 
-0.7 
-1.3 
-3.6 
-1.7 
-1.8 
-6.9 
+2.7 
+3.1 
-2.5 

4.1 Dec 
4.0 Q3§ 
2.7 Nov 

4.3 Oct†† 

5.7 Dec 
8.7 Nov 
5.4 Nov 
6.7 Nov 
9.2 Nov 

3.6 Nov‡ 

20.5 Sep 
11.0 Nov 
5.4 Dec 
16.7 Nov 

2.5 Nov‡ 

4.3 Nov 

4.0 Oct‡‡ 
6.6 Dec§ 
5.1 Nov§ 
5.8 Nov§ 

3.0 Dec 
10.3 Oct§ 
5.5 Dec 

2.9 Dec‡‡ 

4.9 Dec 
5.5 Q3§ 

3.3 Nov§ 
5.9 2015 

5.0 Q4§ 
2.2 Q3 

3.3 Dec§ 

3.7 Dec 

1.1 Nov§ 

8.3 Q3§ 
12.0 Nov§ 

6.5 Nov§‡‡ 
8.4 Nov§ 

3.4 Dec 

6.9 Dec§ 

11.9 Q3§ 
4.3 Nov 
5.8 Q3 
27.7 Q3§ 

Budget 
balance 

Interest
rates, %

% of GDP 10-year gov't 
2017† 
bonds, latest 
-3.5 
2.66 
-4.3 
3.87§§ 
-4.5 
0.07 
-2.9 
1.41 
-1.8 
2.27 
-1.3 
0.58 
-1.0 
0.66 
-1.7 
0.83 
-2.9 
0.84 
+0.6 
0.58 
-0.7 
3.70 
-2.3 
1.91 
+0.7 
0.61 
-3.0 
1.40 
+0.7 
1.78 
-0.6 
0.61 
+5.2 
1.77 
-3.3 
3.34 
-2.1 
8.13 
+1.0 
0.86 
+0.8 
0.06 
-1.9 
12.01 
-1.5 
2.83 
+3.2 
1.98 
-3.1 
7.28 
-2.8 
6.18 
-2.9 
3.95 
-5.9 
8.50††† 
-2.1 
6.02 
-1.0 
2.15 
+0.9 
2.64 
-0.1 
1.05 
-2.4 
2.34 
-6.1 
3.44 
-8.0 
8.58 
-2.7 
4.54 
-3.3 
6.37 
-1.9 
7.50 
-3.0 
na 
-10.9 
na 
-1.8 
1.68 
-8.9 
na 
-3.9 
8.36 

Currency units, per $

Jan 24th 
- 
6.39 
109 
0.70 
1.23 
0.81 
0.81 
0.81 
0.81 
0.81 
0.81 
0.81 
0.81 
0.81 
20.5 
6.01 
7.76 
3.35 
56.3 
7.94 
0.95 
3.73 
1.24 
7.82 
63.7 
13,314 
3.91 
111 
51.0 
1.31 
1,070 
29.2 
31.6 
19.5 
3.18 
603 
2,814 
18.5 
3.21 
17.7 
3.41 
3.75 
11.9 

year ago
-
6.86
113
0.80
1.32
0.93
0.93
0.93
0.93
0.93
0.93
0.93
0.93
0.93
25.1
6.91
8.32
4.06
59.3
8.84
1.00
3.76
1.32
7.76
68.2
13,331
4.44
105
49.8
1.42
1,166
31.4
35.2
16.0
3.17
654
2,935
21.4
3.28
18.9
3.79
3.75
13.3

Source: Haver Analytics.  *% change on previous quar ter, annual rate. †The Economist poll or Economist Intelligence Unit estimate/forecast. §Not seasonally adjusted. ‡New ser ies. **Year ending June. ††Latest 3 
months. ‡‡3-month moving average. §§5-year yield. †††Dollar-denominated bonds. 

 
 
 
 
The Economist Januar y 27th 2018 

Economic and ﬁnancial indicators 77

Markets

Markets

3,673.1 
4,146.8 
5,495.2 
13,414.7 
884.0 
23,622.6 
566.0 
1,068.7 
1,138.6 
944.7 
40,979.8 
939.4 
67,339.2 
1,292.3 
1,631.2 
9,547.6 
119,648.3 
6,168.8 

% change on
Dec 30th 2016
Index 
one 
in local 
in $
Jan 24th week currency terms
26,252.1 
+0.5 
+32.8 +32.8
3,728.4 
+3.3 
+14.7 +24.8
23,940.8 
+0.3 
+25.3 +33.8
7,643.4 
-1.1 
+7.0 +23.2
16,284.2 
-0.3 
+6.5 +15.7
+0.7 
+13.3 +33.1
+0.8 
+10.7 +30.0
+1.2 
+40.3 +64.7
nil 
+15.0 +35.0
nil 
+13.0 +32.7
+1.8 
+16.8 
+37.2
+5.0 
+37.3 +61.2
+0.5 
+22.8 +44.2
+0.5 
+17.2 
+37.5
+0.8 
+13.3 +33.0
+2.1 
+23.5 +54.4
+0.6 
+18.3 +38.7
+3.6 
+28.0 +50.2
+0.4 
+22.8 +36.2
+1.0 
+30.1 +62.2
+2.2 
+12.1 +12.1
+0.5 
+7.5 +23.1
+1.1 
+16.2 +24.8
+2.6 
+53.1 +44.2
+0.6 
+7.9 +20.5
+3.0 
+49.8 +48.6
+3.1 
+35.8 +44.8
+2.7 
+24.9 +26.4
+0.5 
+11.9 +28.3
+3.9 
-5.7 
-11.0
+1.9 
+25.3 +38.3
+0.9 
+25.2 +41.4
+1.3 
+20.5 +32.8
+0.6 
+19.2 +34.9
+4.0 
+107 
+67.3
+3.1 
+38.9 +42.1
+0.2 
+40.6 +56.2
+4.1 
+21.8 +30.0
+2.0 
+11.2 +23.8
+7.0 
7,752 
na
-0.2 
+22.9 +25.7
+0.6 
+9.7 +23.7
-0.8 
+3.3 
+3.4
+1.1 
+21.7 +39.7

United States (DJIA) 
China (SSEA) 
Japan (Nikkei 225) 
Br itain (FTSE 100) 
Canada (S&P TSX) 
Euro area (FTSE Euro 100) 1,260.4 
Euro area (EURO STOXX 50) 3,643.2 
Austr ia (ATX) 
Belgium (Bel 20) 
France (CAC 40) 
Germany (DAX)* 
Greece (Athex Comp) 
Italy (FTSE/MIB) 
Netherlands (AEX) 
Spain (Madr id SE) 
Czech Republic (PX) 
Denmark (OMXCB) 
Hungary (BUX) 
Norway (OSEAX) 
Poland (WIG) 
Russia (RTS, $ terms) 
Sweden (OMXS30) 
Switzerland (SMI) 
Turkey (BIST) 
Australia (All Ord.) 
Hong Kong (Hang Seng) 32,958.7 
India (BSE) 
Indonesia (JSX) 
Malaysia (KLSE) 
Pakistan (KSE) 
Singapore (STI) 
South Korea (KOSPI) 
Taiwan (TWI)  
Thailand (SET) 
Argentina (MERV) 
Brazil (BVSP) 
Chile (IGPA) 
Colombia (IGBC) 
Mexico (IPC) 
Venezuela (IBC) 
Egypt (EGX 30) 
Israel (TA-125) 
Saudi Arabia (Tadawul) 
South Afr ica (JSE AS) 

36,161.6 
6,615.5 
1,837.0 
45,063.2 
3,609.2 
2,538.0 
11,152.2 
1,839.0 
34,948.6 
83,679.9 
29,149.4 
12,314.0 
50,746.9 
2,489.8 
15,170.7 
1,401.0 
7,479.1 
61,623.1 

Football wealth

Manchester United retained their title as
football’s r ichest club when Deloitte, a
consultancy, released its annual Football
Money League rankings. Despite not
being in the lucrative Champions League
for the 2016-17 season, the Red Devils
won the Europa League, a second-tier
competition and, with the broadcasting
might of the English Premier League
behind them, held oﬀ the Champions
League and Spanish league winners, Real
Madr id. English teams dominate the list.
The 2016-17 season was the ﬁrst of a new
three-year Premier League TV deal wor th
around £2.8bn ($3.9bn) per season. Such
largesse may not last. Analysts warn that
future football r ights auctions may be
less frenzied.

Other markets

Other markets

% change on
Dec 30th 2016
Index 
one 
in local 
in $
Jan 24th week currency terms
2,837.5 
+1.2 
+26.7 +26.7
7,415.1 
+1.6 
+37.7 
+37.7
346.1 
+0.4 
+1.3 
+1.3
1,901.2 
+0.6 
+25.2 +33.7
+0.7 
+10.3 +29.4
+1.5 
+27.5 
+27.5
+3.0 
+46.0 +46.0
546.0 
+1.6 
+29.4 +29.4
965.7 
+0.8 
+9.2 
+9.2
831.4 
-0.6 
+7.7 
+7.7
1,309.8§ 
+0.8 
+8.8 
+8.8
11.5 +11.9 
+14.0 (levels)
43.8 
-0.9 
-39.3 
-28.7
46.6 
-3.0 
-31.3 
-31.3
9.5 +11.2 
+42.9 
+67.8

United States (S&P 500) 
United States (NAScomp) 
China (SSEB, $ terms) 
Japan (Topix) 
Europe (FTSEurof irst 300) 1,574.9 
World, dev'd (MSCI) 
Emerging markets (MSCI) 1,258.7 
World, all (MSCI) 
World bonds (Citigroup) 
EMBI+ (JPMorgan) 
Hedge funds (HFRX) 
Volatility, US (VIX) 
CDSs, Eur (iTRAXX)† 
CDSs, N Am (CDX)† 
Carbon trading (EU ETS) € 

2,232.3 

Sources: IHS Markit; Thomson Reuters.  *Total return index. 
†Credit-default-swap spreads, basis points. §Jan 23rd.

Indicators for more countr ies and additional
Indicators for more countr ies and additional

ser ies, go to: Economist.com/indicators
ser ies, go to: Economist.com/indicators

Revenue, 2016-17 season, €m
Commercial
Broadcast
200
400

0

Matchday
600
800

Manchester United

Real Madr id

Barcelona

Bayern Munich

Manchester City

Arsenal

Par is Saint-Germain

Chelsea

Liverpool

Juventus

Tottenham Hotspur

Borussia Dor tmund

Source: Deloitte

The Economist commodity-pr ice index

2005=100

The Economist commodity-price index

% change on
one 
one
Jan 23rd* month 
year

Dollar Index

All Items 
Food 
Industr ials 
 All 
 Nfa† 
 Metals 

Sterling Index

All items 

Euro Index

All items 

Gold

$ per oz 

Jan 16th 

149.8 
148.5 

151.2 
141.7 
155.2 

151.1 
150.4 

151.8 
142.6 
155.7 

+2.3 
+1.9 

+2.6 
+4.2 
+2.0 

+0.8
-7.7

+11.4
-2.0
+17.7

197.8 

196.0 

-2.5 

-10.2

152.3 

152.8 

-1.3 

-11.9

1,335.1 

1,337.3 

+4.3 

+10.2

West Texas Intermediate

$ per barrel 

63.7 

64.5 

+7.5 

+22.6

Sources: Bloomberg; CME Group; Cotlook; Darmenn & Curl; FT; ICCO;
ICO; ISO; Live Rice Index; LME; NZ Wool Ser vices; Thompson Lloyd & 
Ewar t; Thomson Reuters; Urner Barr y; WSJ.  *Provisional  
†Non-food agr iculturals.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
78

Obituar y Paul Bocuse

The maker of chefs

singing. For what country was better provi-
sioned than France? Her shores were
washed with a seething bouillabaisse of
ﬁsh, her gardens laden with good things;
Charolais cattle grazed the ﬁelds, chickens
from Bresse pecked in farmyards. And the
wines! He was France’s most fervent am-
bassador, setting up restaurants in America
and Japan, and providing food both for
Disney’s French enterprises and for Con-
corde—always taking his own ingredients
with him, to be sure they were the best. 

Paul Bocuse, popularly acclaimed as the best French chef since Escoﬃer, died on
January 20th, aged 91
IN IMPISH mood, Paul Bocuse would roll
up the sleeve of his whites to reveal, on
his left bicep, a tattoo of a Gallic cock crow-
ing. An American GI had done it for him
during the war, and it seemed just right for
his subsequent career as France’s most cel-
ebrated chef. This was a man who was
called the pope, even God, by lowlier
meal-makers, and whose death, said Em-
manuel Macron, had chefs everywhere
weeping in their kitchens.
He was the most decorated of them all,
and not simply with Michelin stars, of
which his restaurant, L’Auberge du Pont de
Collonges “Paul Bocuse”, near Lyons, had
held three for over 50 years. (To match his
three stars he had, for almost as long, three
women, fairly harmoniously; his appetites
were large.) With his whites he usually
wore the tricolore collar of a Meilleur Ouv-
rier de France, and occasionally his Légion
d’Honneur on its red ribbon. On that glori-
ous evening in 1975, when his medal had
been pinned on by the president, they had
sat down to his own invention, black-truf-
ﬂe soup VGE, for Valéry Giscard d’Estaing.
It was served ever after in his restaurant, in
specially inscribed white bowls.
The cockerel proclaimed his patriotism,
as if it were in any doubt; he was ever the
small boy who loved to run after marching
bands on the 14th of July, shouting and

Nitrogen, pfuit!
He could crow about French cooking, too.
From Carême to Maître Escoﬃer to him-
self, there was none better. Cuisine clas-
sique had become over-fussy, but its funda-
mentals, butter, cream and wine, were so
magical that nothing could replace them.
(A dish of just-made fromage frais with
cream was, for him, pure joy.) With a little
simplifying, more emphasis on freshness,
French cuisine would again be unbeatable.
He signed on brieﬂy to nouvelle cuisine, but
in the end it bored him; nothing on the
plate, lots on the bill, was his conclusion.
Instead his menus oﬀered the grand, sub-
stantial dishes of the decades: duck with
foie gras, pike quenelles, ﬁllet of beef Rossi-
ni, coq au vin. The only inventions of his
own were the truﬄe soup and sea bass in

The Economist Januar y 27th 2018

pastry. He was no fad-follower, no ﬁddler.
Molecular cuisine, bof! Nitrogen, pfuit!
Give him some sausage and a glass of good
Mâcon, in the company of friends, any day. 
What made him most content, though,
were two apparently smaller things. The
ﬁrst was the rescue of his family name. The
Bocuses had been chefs since the 18th cen-
tury, always in that little auberge on the
Saône: the house he had been born in,
with the murmur of the river outside.
There he caught ﬁsh, and in that kitchen, at
nine, he had ﬁrst served up veal kidneys
with puréed potatoes. But the restaurant
had been sold, and the name lost, by his
grandfather, and not until 1959 could he get
the building back. He won his ﬁrst Miche-
lin star when there were still paper cloths
on the tables. Gradually it became splen-
did, with crimson shutters and green paint,
a ceremonial courtyard and much brass.
Inside, preserved as a shrine, was his
grandmother’s kitchen, with its battery of
copper pans; and the name “Paul Bocuse”
marched in neon across the roof.
The second source of pride was easier
to overlook. By the 21st century, celebrity
chefs were everywhere, foraging, posing,
fronting restaurants, writing books. Yet
when he began, just after the war, chefs
toiled and broiled behind the scenes,
while the owners patrolled the dining
rooms. At La Mère Brazier’s in Lyon, as an
apprentice, he had to feed the pigs and do
the laundry, as well as bring in the coal. Per-
haps his chief accomplishment was to
make chefs emerge, proud of themselves. 
They had every reason to be, as artisans
who loved their craft. A good chef like him-
self worked (and worked, and worked!) by
instinct, accepting that a recipe would be
subtly diﬀerent every time. That ﬁnal sea-
soning, with the tips of the ﬁngers, was a
beautiful gesture, his signing of the dish.
And once it was done, the chef should
leave the kitchen, greet the diners, present
what he had made. Hence the many por-
traits of him in his restaurant, so that even
when he was away, or no longer cooked
himself, he was there. He positively en-
couraged his cooks to open their own res-
taurants, and was delighted to welcome
650 students each year to his chef’s school
at Écully. Even young women came—
though he preferred women in bed, and
smelling of Chanel rather than cooking fat. 
A chef’s sense of his own importance
began, he insisted, with the uniform: the
calot or the tall toque, the immaculate
white jacket and the apron, the clothes of
his trade. That moment when, preparing
for his entrée en scène, he tied his apron rib-
bons round his capacious waist, was the
proudest part of all. And he might just have
time too to roll up his sleeve, ﬂash a smile
and cry “Cocorico!”, in case anyone
doubted who, and which country, ruled
the culinary world. 7

WAR ON CANCE R 
SOUTH -EA ST 
A S IA 20 18

Shared struggles, 
collective success

20%

off

the standard 
rate
with code  
TE3348

Register today and save

March 20th 
2018
Ja ka r ta

Featured speakers:

NILA FARID MOELOEK
Minister of health
Indonesia

SUBRAMANIAM 
SATHASIVAM
Minister of health  
Malaysia

PATHOMPHORN 
SIRAPRAPASIRI 
Senior adviser
National Cancer Institute
Ministry of Public Health 
Thailand

PANDU HARIMURTI
Senior health specialist
World Bank

War on Cancer South-East As ia 2018 a ims to uncover 
innovat ive ways to fund cancer care—from prevent ion to 
pa l l iat ive care— in the reg ion’s low- and m idd le- income 
count r ies (LM ICs) . It a lso seeks to serve as a cata lyst for 
co l lect ive act ion in response to th is grow ing cha l lenge , wh ich 
demands an urgent response . Jo in po l icymakers , hea lth-care 
prov iders , insurers , investors , sc ient ist s , techno log ist s and 
lead ing th inkers to exp lore how to f i l l the gap in cancer fund ing 
across South-East As ia’s LM ICs .

waroncancerasia.economist .com

Contact us:

+852 2585 3312

asiaevents@economist.com

@EconomistEvents
#WarOnCancer

Platinum sponsor 

Silver sponsor 

World’s First
“Self-Driving”
Database

Oracle 
Autonomous
Database

No Human Labor – Half the Cost
No Human Error – 100x More Reliable

oracle.com/selfdrivingdb

Human labo r re fe r s to tun ing , pa t ch ing , upda t ing , and ma in tenan c e o f da t aba se .
Copy r igh t © 2017, O ra c le and /o r i t s a f f i l ia te s . A l l r igh t s re se r ved . O ra c le and Java a re reg is te red t radema r k s o f O ra c le and /o r i t s a f f i l ia te s .

