The message of protests in Iran

Blue-state Republicans: no right left

Education lessons from Pakistan

The world’s worst airports

JANUARY 6TH– 12TH 2018

The next frontier

When thoughts control mach ines

Contents

The Economist Januar y 6th 2018 3

5 The world this week

Leaders
7 Neurotechnology

The next frontier

8 Peru

The pardoner’s tale

8 Protests in Iran

The tyrants of Tehran

9 Education reform

Pupil power in Pakistan

10 Amer ican politics

In praise of state-ism

Letters
11 On China, Ben Carson,
“Howard’s End”, meat,
politics

Br ieﬁng
13 Education in Pakistan

Stepping up

Asia
15 Chr istianity in
South-East Asia

Escalators to heaven

16 Feudalism in Pakistan

Quail, cotton and
contumacy

17 Japan’s broadcaster

Snor ingly bor ing

18 Child abuse in the
Philippines

Caught in the web

19 Banyan

Kim v Trump, round two

China
20 Internet controls

Closing a loophole

21 The environment

A good day for elephants

United States
22 Congress

The polar ising express

23 Life expectancy

Not great, again

24 Republicans

Hell’s laundr y list

24 High-tax states

Replanning

25 Voting laws

Use it or lose it

26 Legalising pot

California inhales

The Amer icas
27 Peru

The presidential hostage

28 Emeralds in Colombia

Prospectors, barons 
and suits

29 Place names in Canada

Rewr iting the map

Middle East and Afr ica
30 Protests in Iran

When frustration boils over

31 Qat in Yemen

The drug star ving a countr y

31 Yemen’s war

The balance shif ts

32 Egyptian politics

Cometh the hour, cometh
the ban

33 Congo’s president

Never-ending term

33 Gambia

Waiting for Jammeh

34 Liber ia’s George Weah

A man with goals

Technology Quarterly
Brain-computer
inter faces

Af ter page 34

Europe
35 Italy’s election

Their generation

36 Spain and Catalonia

Local diﬃculties

37 Russia

Cardboard Kremlin

37 Obesity in France

Body positive

38 Turkey’s economy

Fir ing on all cylinders

On the cover

Brain-computer inter faces
may change what it means to
be human: leader, page 7.
Innovations in neuro-
technology sound like the
stuﬀ of science ﬁction.
Sor ting the reality from the
hype. See Technology
Quar terly, af ter page 34

The Economist online

Daily analysis and opinion to
supplement the pr int edition, plus
audio and video, and a daily char t
Economist.com
E-mail: newsletters and
mobile edition
Economist.com/email
Pr int edition: available online by
7pm London time each Thursday
Economist.com/pr int
Audio edition: available online 
to download each Fr iday
Economist.com/audioedition

Volume 426 Number 9073

Published since September 1843

to take par t in "a severe contest between 
intelligence, which presses forward, and 
an unwor thy, timid ignorance obstructing 
our progress."

Editorial oﬃces in London and also:

Beijing, Berlin, Brussels, Cairo, Chicago, Madr id,
Mexico City, Moscow, Mumbai, Nairobi, New Delhi,
New York, Par is, San Francisco, São Paulo, Seoul,
Shanghai, Singapore, Tokyo, Washington DC

Protests in Iran Citizens

demand, and deser ve, a less
oppressive regime: leader,
page 8. The countr y is in
turmoil, but the cler ics and
their allies remain as
entrenched as ever, page 30

Italian politics As their

countr y prepares to vote,
young Italians are fed up with
the traditional par ties, page 35

Education in Pakistan School

reforms that hold lessons for
other developing countr ies:
leader, page 9. Pakistan is
home to the most frenetic
education reforms in the
world, page 13

1

Contents continues overleaf

4 Contents

The Economist Januar y 6th 2018

Science and technology
56 The search for MH370

Many scanners, ver y deep

57 Digital assistants

Losing face

58 Space debr is

Junk hunting

Books and arts
59 Enr ico Fermi

Clever calculator

60 The Economists’ diet

Quantitative eating

60 University education

Three years and score

61 Japanese taiko drumming

The kudos of Kodo

61 Amer ican ﬁction

Chloe Benjamin

62 Johnson

Word-bir th

64 Economic and ﬁnancial
indicators

Statistics on 42 economies,
plus a closer look at GDP
forecasts for the year
ahead

Obituar y
66 Simonetta Puccini

O mio nonno caro

Br itain
40 The NHS

A thinning front line

41 Train travel

Oﬀ the rails

42 Bagehot

Drama and dr if t in 2018

International
43 The worst airports

The depar ture gates of hell

Business
45 Kim Sang-jo

South Korea’s chaebol
sniper

46 Ant Financial and
Moneygram

Blocked transfer

47 Money-launder ing
in Canada

Snow-washing

48 Salesforce

The tower of Benioﬀ

49 Schumpeter

The year of the incumbent

Finance and economics
51 China’s environment

Towards a greener future

52 Buttonwood

The markets in 2018

53 Islamic ﬁnance

Sukuk and see

53 Amer ican banks

Deferred gratiﬁcation

54 MiFID 2

Day zero

55 Free exchange

Investments since 1870

Green regulation in China

The anti-pollution campaign
may cr imp growth by less than
feared, page 51. How China’s
r ise aﬀects the natural world,
page 21

Incumbents ﬁght back

In 2018 conventional ﬁrms will
give Silicon Valley a run for its
money: Schumpeter, page 49

Chaebol sniper South Korea’s

antitrust tsar has a shot at
getting the chaebol to play by
the rules, page 45

The world’s worst airports

An informal sur vey of the most
horr ible places to be lost in
transit, page 43

Subscription service

For our full range of subscription offers, 
including digital only or print and digital 
combined visit
Economist.com/offers
You can subscribe or renew your subscription 
by mail, telephone or fax at the details below:
Telephone: +65 6534 5166 
Facsimile: +65 6534 5066
Web: 
Economist.com/offers
E-mail: 
Post: 

Asia@subscriptions.economist.com

The Economist 
Subscription Centre,
Tanjong Pagar Post Office
PO Box 671
Singapore 910817 

Subscription for 1 year (51 issues)Print only

Australia 
China 
Hong Kong & Macau 
India 
Japan 
Korea 
Malaysia 
New Zealand 
Singapore & Brunei 
Taiwan 
Thailand 
Other countries 

A$465
CNY 2,300
HK$2,300
 10,000
Yen 44,300
KRW 375,000
RM 780
NZ$530
S$425
NT$9,000
US$300
Contact us as above

Pr incipal commercial oﬃces:

The Adelphi Building, 1-11 John Adam Street,

London WC2N 6HT

Tel: +44 (0) 20 7830 7000
Rue de l’Athénée 32
1206 Geneva, Switzerland
Tel: +41 22 566 2470 
750 3rd Avenue, 5th Floor, New York, NY 10017 
Tel: +1 212 541 0500 
1301 Cityplaza Four,
12 Taikoo Wan Road, Taikoo Shing, Hong Kong
Tel: +852 2585 3888

Other commercial oﬃces:

Chicago, Dubai, Frankfur t, Los Angeles,
Par is, San Francisco and Singapore 

PEFC certiﬁed
This copy of The Economist
is pr inted on paper sourced
from sustainably managed
forests, recycled and controlled
sources cer tiﬁed by PEFC
www.pefc.org

PEFC/01-31-162

© 2018 The Economist Newspaper Limited. All r ights reser ved. Neither this publication nor any par t of it may be reproduced, stored in a retr ieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or
otherwise, without the pr ior permission of The Economist Newspaper Limited. Published ever y week, except for a year-end double issue, by The Economist Newspaper Limited. The Economist is a registered trademark of The Economist Newspaper Limited.
Publisher: The Economist. Pr inted by Times Pr inters (in Singapore).
M.C.I. (P) No.057/09/2017 PPS 677/11/2012(022861)

 
 
 
 
The world this week

The Economist Januar y 6th 2018 5

dismissed by Spain’s prime
minister, Mariano Rajoy, after
it declared independence.
Unfortunately for Mr Rajoy,
Catalans returned the separat-
ists to power again in the elec-
tion on December 21st.

nised the incumbent
president, Juan Orlando Her-
nández, as the victor. The
Organisation of American
States had said that irregular-
ities cast doubt on the result
and called for new elections. 

Italy’s president dissolved
parliament and set an election
date, March 4th. 

Russia’s authorities banned
Alexei Navalny, the country’s
most prominent opponent to
President Vladimir Putin, from
standing in the presidential
election due in March, citing a
trumped-up graft conviction. 

Thousands of people in Peru
protested against the pardon-
ing of Alberto Fujimori, a
former president who had
served less than half of a 25-
year jail sentence for corrup-
tion and human-rights abuses.
The current president, Pedro
Pablo Kuczynski, said he had
pardoned the 79-year-old on
health grounds. But he made
the decision three days after
Mr Fujimori’s son and nine
other legislators from his party
abstained on a vote to
impeach Mr Kuczynski. 

Salvador Nasralla conceded
defeat in Honduras’s presi-
dential election, held in No-
vember, after America recog-

The decision by Orrin Hatch
to step down from his Senate
seat in Utah prompted specu-
lation that Mitt Romney would
run to replace him. Donald
Trump had wanted Mr Hatch
to stay on. Mr Romney, a for-
mer presidential candidate,
could become a focal point for
Republicans who are dis-
gruntled with Mr Trump. 

India’s feuding Ambani
brothers reached a deal on
their telecoms assets. In what
amounts to a defeat in an
aggressive price war, Anil sold
Reliance Communications to
Mukesh’s Reliance Jio, which
entered the market by oﬀering
free calls and data packages.
The deal hands back full con-
trol of the telecom company to
the older brother, 12 years after
Anil took charge. 

SoftBank secured a deal to
take a stake in Uber. The Japa-
nese technology group will
own 15% of the ride-hailing
ﬁrm (the total holding of the
consortium it heads is over
17%). The investment values

Uber at $48bn, lower than the
$68bn placed on it after a
recent round of fundraising. 

Spotify, a music-streaming
ﬁrm, reportedly ﬁled docu-
ments that could see it list in
New York this year. 

It was another volatile week
for trading in bitcoin, which
plunged in late December from
a high of more than $19,500 to
below $12,000. It recovered
ground this week after a report
that Peter Thiel, a famed Sil-
icon Valley investor, had bet on
the cryptocurrency.

Glitches were discovered in
the design of computer chips
that could give hackers access
to passwords and encryption
keys. The ﬂaws are industry-
wide. Intel said it was working
with AMD and other rivals to
resolve the problems, which
could involve more than issu-
ing the usual software patch. 

There was not a single plane
crash involving a passenger
jet in 2017, according to the
Aviation Safety Network, the
ﬁrst time that has happened
since 1957. The number of
deaths resulting from civilian
aircraft accidents was just 44. 

Other economic data and news
can be found on pages 64-65

Protesters took to the streets in
more than 70 towns and cities
in Iran, some complaining
about the economy, others
wishing death on the presi-
dent, Hassan Rouhani, and the
supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali
Khamenei. The clerical regime
organised counter-demonstra-
tions that attracted tens of
thousands. At least 20 people
have been killed, and many
more arrested. 

Ethiopia announced that it
would release hundreds of
political prisoners and close a
detention centre where people
were allegedly tortured.
Amnesty International said
this “could signal the end of an
era of bloody repression”.

North Korea said it might send
a team to the Winter Olympics
in South Korea. The two coun-
tries re-opened a defunct
hotline. Kim Jong Un boasted
that he had a nuclear button
on his desk and could strike
anywhere in America. Donald
Trump retorted that he, too,
had a button: a “bigger and
more powerful” one.

Mr Trump repeated a long-
standing gripe that Pakistan
harbours terrorists America is
ﬁghting in Afghanistan, adding
that it did not deserve Ameri-
can aid. A Pakistani oﬃcial
who clearly understood Mr
Trump’s complaint said it was
“incomprehensible”. 

The new year saw the imple-
mentation of new trade mea-
sures in China: a ban on all
sales of ivory and on imports
of low-grade waste for recy-
cling. Environmentalists may
cheer, but not donkeys—China
also cut tariﬀs on imports of
the animals’ skins, which is
likely to fuel demand for them
as an ingredient in traditional
Chinese medicine. 

A court in the Chinese city of
Tianjin sentenced a human-
rights activist, Wu Gan, to
eight years in prison, the har-
shest punishment imposed
during a crackdown on such
activists that began in 2015. 

Catalonia voted for a new
parliament to replace the one

Leaders

The next frontier

The Economist Januar y 6th 2018 7

Brain-computer interfaces may change what it means to be human
T ECHNOLOGIES are often
billed as transformative. For
William Kochevar, the term is
justiﬁed. Mr Kochevar is para-
lysed below the shoulders after
a cycling accident, yet has man-
aged to feed himself by his own
hand. This remarkable feat is
partly thanks to electrodes, implanted in his right arm, which
stimulate muscles. But the real magic lies higher up. Mr Koche-
var can control his arm using the power of thought. His inten-
tion to move is reﬂected in neural activity in his motor cortex;
these signals are detected by implants in his brain and pro-
cessed into commands to activate the electrodes in his arms. 
An ability to decode thought in this way may sound like sci-
ence ﬁction. But brain-computer interfaces (BCIs) like the
BrainGate system used by Mr Kochevar provide evidence that
mind-control can work. Researchers are able to tell what
words and images people have heard and seen from neural ac-
tivity alone. Information can also be encoded and used to
stimulate the brain. Over 300,000 people have cochlear im-
plants, which help them to hear by converting sound into elec-
trical signals and sending them into the brain. Scientists have
“injected” data into monkeys’ heads, instructing them to per-
form actions via electrical pulses.
As our Technology Quarterly in this issue explains, the pace
of research into BCIs and the scale of its ambition are increas-
ing. Both America’s armed forces and Silicon Valley are start-
ing to focus on the brain. Facebook dreams of thought-to-text
typing. Kernel, a startup, has $100m to spend on neurotechnol-
ogy. Elon Musk has formed a ﬁrm called Neuralink; he thinks
that, if humanity is to survive the advent of artiﬁcial intelli-
gence, it needs an upgrade. Entrepreneurs envisage a world in
which people can communicate telepathically, with each oth-
er and with machines, or acquire superhuman abilities, such
as hearing at very high frequencies. 
These powers, if they ever materialise, are decades away.
But well before then, BCIs could open the door to remarkable
new applications. Imagine stimulating the visual cortex to
help the blind, forging new neural connections in stroke vic-
tims or monitoring the brain for signs of depression. By turning
the ﬁring of neurons into a resource to be harnessed, BCIs may
change the idea of what it means to be human. 

That thinking feeling
Sceptics scoﬀ. Taking medical BCIs out of the lab into clinical
practice has proved very diﬃcult. The BrainGate system used
by Mr Kochevar was developed more than ten years ago, but
only a handful of people have tried it out. Turning implants
into consumer products is even harder to imagine. The path to
the mainstream is blocked by three formidable barriers—tech-
nological, scientiﬁc and commercial. 
Start with technology. Non-invasive techniques like an
electroencephalogram (EEG) struggle to pick up high-resolu-
tion brain signals through intervening layers of skin, bone and
membrane. Some advances are being made—on EEG caps that

can be used to play virtual-reality games or control industrial
robots using thought alone. But for the time being at least, the
most ambitious applications require implants that can interact
directly with neurons. And existing devices have lots of draw-
backs. They involve wires that pass through the skull; they pro-
voke immune responses; they communicate with only a few
hundred of the 85bn neurons in the human brain. But that
could soon change. Helped by advances in miniaturisation
and increased computing power, eﬀorts are under way to
make safe, wireless implants that can communicate with hun-
dreds of thousands of neurons. Some of these interpret the
brain’s electrical signals; others experiment with light, magne-
tism and ultrasound. 
Clear the technological barrier, and another one looms. The
brain is still a foreign country. Scientists know little about how
exactly it works, especially when it comes to complex func-
tions like memory formation. Research is more advanced in
animals, but experiments on humans are hard. Yet, even today,
some parts of the brain, like the motor cortex, are better under-
stood. Nor is complete knowledge always needed. Machine
learning can recognise patterns of neural activity; the brain it-
self gets the hang of controlling BCIS with extraordinary ease.
And neurotechnology will reveal more of the brain’s secrets.

Like a hole in the head
The third obstacle comprises the practical barriers to commer-
cialisation. It takes time, money and expertise to get medical
devices approved. And consumer applications will take oﬀ
only if they perform a function people ﬁnd useful. Some of the
applications for brain-computer interfaces are unnecessary—a
good voice-assistant is a simpler way to type without ﬁngers
than a brain implant, for example. The idea of consumers
clamouring for craniotomies also seems far-fetched. Yet brain
implants are already an established treatment for some condi-
tions. Around 150,000 people receive deep-brain stimulation
via electrodes to help them control Parkinson’s disease. Elec-
tive surgery can become routine, as laser-eye procedures show.
All of which suggests that a route to the future imagined by
the neurotech pioneers is arduous but achievable. When hu-
man ingenuity is applied to a problem, however hard, it is un-
wise to bet against it. Within a few years, improved technol-
ogies may be opening up new channels of communications
with the brain. Many of the ﬁrst applications hold out unam-
biguous promise—of movement and senses restored. But as
uses move to the augmentation of abilities, whether for mili-
tary purposes or among consumers, a host of concerns will
arise. Privacy is an obvious one: the refuge of an inner voice
may disappear. Security is another: if a brain can be reached
on the internet, it can also be hacked. Inequality is a third: ac-
cess to superhuman cognitive abilities could be beyond all ex-
cept a self-perpetuating elite. Ethicists are already starting to
grapple with questions of identity and agency that arise when
a machine is in the neural loop.
These questions are not urgent. But the bigger story is that
neither are they the realm of pure fantasy. Technology changes
the way people live. Beneath the skull lies the next frontier. 7

8 Leaders

Peru

The pardoner’s tale

The Economist Januar y 6th 2018

Presidential powers should not be used to undermine the rule of law
ON THE evening of Decem-
ber 24th, as Peru was pre-
paring for its Christmas dinner,
Pedro Pablo Kuczynski, 
the
country’s president, bestowed
an unexpected present on a
jailed predecessor, Alberto Fuji-
mori: a pardon. This came just
three days after Mr Kuczynski hung on to his job thanks to ten
fujimorista legislators led by Alberto’s son, Kenji, who ab-
stained in a vote on an attempt to impeach him for links to
Odebrecht, a tainted Brazilian construction ﬁrm. Mr Kuczynski
insisted that the pardon was for “humanitarian reasons”. Few
Peruvians believe him. More likely, it was a grubby political
deal that bodes ill for his country (see page 27). Many of his al-
lies feel as conned by this pardon as people who bought fake
relics from Chaucer’s pardoner in “The Canterbury Tales”.
More than 15 years after the collapse of his decade of auto-
cratic rule, Alberto Fujimori continues to divide his country.
His supporters say he saved Peru from hyperinﬂation and
Maoist terrorism and set it on the path of sustained economic
growth. For his critics, he was a dictator who shut down con-
gress, destroyed checks and balances, engaged in bribery and
was complicit in a death squad. Both are right. But what is in-
disputable is that Mr Fujimori broke the law. He was found
guilty in trials that were legally impeccable. His imprisonment
was a landmark for Latin America, a message that all should be
equal before the law in a region where the norm has too often
been impunity for the rich and powerful.
Mr Fujimori has served more than ten years in jail (though
that is less than half his sentence). He is 79, has a heart condi-
tion and is in remission from cancer of the tongue. Mr Kuczyn-
ski’s government has been dogged by the vengeful attitude of
Keiko Fujimori, Alberto’s daughter, who narrowly lost the past

two elections and who was behind the (disproportionate) at-
tempt to impeach the president. 
In principle a humanitarian pardon could have been part
of a coherent plan of national reconciliation. But that was not
Mr Kuczynski’s approach. The pardon was rushed, and backed
by questionable medical evidence (there is no reason to think
that Mr Fujimori is at death’s door). The government made no
eﬀort to consult the victims of Mr Fujimori’s rule, nor to seek a
genuine apology from him. Alternatively, a pardon could have
been more Machiavellian: a bargaining chip that Mr Kuczynski
might have traded for fujimorista support for the institutional
reforms—of the judiciary, the civil service and the political sys-
tem—that Peru badly needs. There is no sign of that either. In-
stead, it looks like a sordid bargain to let the president survive. 

A hostage of the Fujimoris
From the start, Mr Kuczynski, a businessman and economist,
was an accident waiting to happen. He has neither political
skills nor, seemingly, any awareness of his lack of them. He
won oﬃce only because of anti-fujimorista sentiment; in de-
fending himself from impeachment he railed against a fuji-
morista “coup”. Yet he has now made himself the fujimoristas’
hostage: few of his original supporters will now defend him,
especially if it transpires that his dealings with Odebrecht in-
volved more than an undeclared conﬂict of interest. He would
have done better to resign and trigger an early election.
The pardoning of Mr Fujimori came days after a similar ef-
fort by Michel Temer, Brazil’s stand-in president. He abused the
traditional Christmas exercise of presidential indulgence to try
to free political cronies jailed for corruption, but the supreme
court stood in his way. Thanks to the eﬀorts of prosecutors and
judges in places like Brazil and in cases like Mr Fujimori’s, Latin
America is starting to enjoy the rule of law. Presidents should
not use the power of pardon to undermine it. 7

Protests in Iran

Berating the tyrants of Tehran

Iranians demand, and deserve, a less oppressive regime
BIG things often have small
beginnings. In the case of
the protests engulﬁng Iran, it
was a steep rise in the price of
eggs. That was why hundreds of
people ﬁrst took to the streets in
Mashhad, Iran’s second city, on
December 28th. They demand-
ed the resignation of Hassan Rouhani, the reformist president,
for failing to bring prosperity to most Iranians.
The protests quickly spread to more than 70 towns and cit-
ies, attracting a broader swathe of malcontents, mostly young
(see page 30). Over 20 people have been killed; hundreds more

have been arrested. The authorities have shut down messag-
ing apps and social-media websites. They have blamed for-
eigners, absurdly, for the unrest and they are threatening a viol-
ent clampdown. Protesters are now calling not only for Mr
Rouhani to go, but for Iran’s clerical leaders, who hold far more
real power, to surrender it. They also denounce the regime’s
armed protectors, the Islamic Revolutionary Guards. Iranians
are fed up with rising living costs, endemic corruption, and po-
litical and social repression.
Is this the start of something even bigger? It is impossible to
know. But it is already clear that the protests hold three damn-
ing messages for Iran’s regime. The ﬁrst concerns its aggressive
foreign policy. The Guards have spent billions of dollars in re-

1

The Economist Januar y 6th 2018 

2

cent years supporting armed groups in Gaza, Lebanon and Ye-
men, as well as propping up a blood-soaked dictator in Syria.
As Iran has ﬁlled the vacuum created by America’s unwilling-
ness to exert hard power in the Middle East, it has extended its
inﬂuence and tormented its big Sunni rival, Saudi Arabia. 
To many outsiders this policy has seemed a stunning suc-
cess. However, the protests are a blow to Iran’s adventurism. A
draft budget leaked last month would increase funding for the
Guards, while slashing subsidies for the poor. The protesters
are having none of it: “Leave Syria, remember us!” they shout.
“Not Gaza, not Lebanon, my life for Iran!” The regime is not
about to pull back from its region but, increasingly, its ambi-
tions face limits at home.
The second blow is to the reformist faction headed by Mr
Rouhani—and to all those who have pinned their hopes on
him as the architect of a sort of Iranian glasnost. Optimists al-
ways think that Iran is about to behave better. When the re-
gime signed a deal in 2015, under which it curbed its nuclear
programme in exchange for a partial lifting of sanctions by
America and other foreign powers, Barack Obama’s aides pre-
dicted that this would empower Iranian reformers. Mr Rou-
hani himself heralded it as a fresh start. Yet the deal was about
curbing Iran’s illicit nuclear ambitions, not curing its oppres-
sive state (one reason President Donald Trump should even
now not pull America out of the nuclear accord). The easing of
sanctions helped the Iranian economy grow, but enough of
them remain to make outsiders wary of dealing with it. The
promised economic beneﬁts have not trickled down. By one
estimate, average Iranians have become 15% poorer over the
past decade. 
To ﬁx the economy Mr Rouhani would need to confront the
Revolutionary Guards, who loom over everything from car-
making to construction and who use their political power to
enrich their commanders and impoverish Iranians. Many

Leaders 9

charities and ﬁrms connected to them ignore the taxman and
refuse to open their books to government scrutiny.
Yet the demonstrations leave Mr Rouhani in a sort of no-
man’s-land. On the one hand, he is too weak to prevail over the
Guards or to defeat his powerful conservative enemies in the
regime, who may have encouraged the original marches in
Mashhad. On the other, he and his failing economic policy
have lost the conﬁdence of working-class Iranians, who gave
him crucial support in last year’s election. 

Baseejed
Optimists note that complaints about corruption, unemploy-
ment and the lack of prospects fuelled the “Arab spring” upris-
ings in 2011. Unlike the Green Movement, which rocked Iran’s
clerical establishment in 2009 with huge rallies in the capital
demanding the overturning of a ﬁshy presidential election, to-
day’s demonstrations have sprung up in rural provinces, long
viewed as more conservative. And though they have been
smaller than in 2009, they have been more intense. “Death to
[Ayatollah Ali] Khamenei,” chant some—risking harsh punish-
ment for disrespecting the supreme leader.
All the same, they may well fail. The regime has all the guns
and all the torture cells, and is not squeamish about using
them. The Green Movement was crushed by the Revolution-
ary Guards’ brutal baseej militia and mass arrests and torture
by the secret police. But the third lesson of today’s protests—
and the hardest for the regime to accept—is that repression can-
not quell popular anger permanently. The last crackdown was
only eight years ago, and already Iranians are out on the streets
again. Mr Trump, who seldom seems to care much about hu-
man rights, was right to call the regime “brutal and corrupt”
and to suggest that Iran needs a change. Iranians are far more
moderate than the rulers who rob and oppress them. Some
day, they may get the government they deserve. 7

Education

Pupil power

1

2

3

4

5

6

0

50

7

8

9

School year

Richest quintile

Poorest quintile

Pakistan

15- to 19-year-olds who have
completed each school year, 2012, %
100

Pakistan’s school reforms hold lessons for other developing countries 
WHEN Pakistan’s schools at-
tract global attention, it is
often as a backdrop to violence.
In October 2012 a masked gun-
man from the Tehreek-e-Taliban
Pakistan boarded a school bus
and shot Malala Yousafzai in the
head, neck and shoulder. Two
years later, and six days after Ms Yousafzai received the Nobel
peace prize, terrorists from the same umbrella group killed 141
people, nearly all pupils, at an army-run school in Peshawar,
one of the deadliest attacks on a school in any country. Accord-
ing to the Global Terrorism Database kept by the University of
Maryland, 867 educational institutions were attacked by Is-
lamists between 2007 and 2015, often because these places
had the temerity to teach science—or worse, educate girls. 
Such attacks have added to problems that schools in Paki-
stan, the world’s sixth-most-populous country, share with
those in other poor states—irrelevant curriculums, high rates of
dropout as children (especially girls) get older, and woeful

teaching. Yet the spectre of violence may have obscured anoth-
er development: the emergence of Pakistan as perhaps the
world’s largest laboratory for education reform (see page 13). 
Pakistan has long been home to a ﬂourishing market of low-
cost private schools, as parents have given up on a dysfunc-
tional state sector and opted instead to pay for a better alterna-
tive. In the province of Punjab alone the number of these
schools has risen from 32,000 in 1990 to 60,000 by 2016. (Eng-
land has just 24,000 schools, albeit much bigger ones.) 
More recently, Pakistani policymakers have begun to use
these private schools to provide state education. Today Paki-
stan has one of the largest school-voucher schemes in the
world. It has outsourced the running of more government-
funded schools than any other developing country. By the end
of this year Punjab aims to have placed 10,000 public schools—
about the number in all of California—in the hands of entre-
preneurs or charities. Although other provinces cannot match
the scope and pace of reforms in Punjab, which is home to 53%
of Pakistanis, Sindh and Khyber Pakhtunkhwa are implement-
ing some similar changes on a smaller scale. 

1

10 Leaders

The Economist Januar y 6th 2018

2

The results are promising—and they hold lessons for re-
formers in other countries. One is that “public-private partner-
ships” can improve children’s results while costing the state
less than running schools itself. A paper published in August
by the World Bank found that a scheme to subsidise local en-
trepreneurs to open schools in 199 villages increased enrol-
ment of six- to ten-year-olds by 30 percentage points and
boosted test scores. Better schools also led parents to encour-
age their sons to become doctors not security guards, and their
daughters to become teachers rather than housewives. 
Other new research suggests that policymakers can also
take simple steps to ﬁx failures in the market for low-cost priv-
ate schools. For example, providing better information for par-
ents through standardised report cards, and making it easier
for entrepreneurs to obtain loans to expand schools, have both
been found to lead to a higher quality of education. 
Another, related lesson is that simply spending more public
money is not going to transform classrooms in poor countries.
The bulk of spending on public education goes on teachers’
salaries, and if they cannot teach, the money is wasted. A re-

vealing recent study looked at what happened between 2003
and 2007, when Punjab hired teachers on temporary contracts
at 35% less pay. It found that the lower wages had no discern-
ible impact on how well teachers taught. 
Such results reﬂect what happens when teachers are hired
corruptly, rather than for their teaching skills. Yet the ﬁnal and
most important lesson from Pakistan is that politicians can
break the link between political patronage and the classroom.
Under Shahbaz Sharif, Punjab’s chief minister, the province
has hired new teachers on merit, not an oﬃcial’s say-so. It uses
data on enrolment and test scores to hold local oﬃcials to ac-
count at regular high-stakes meetings. 

Must try harder
Shifting from “the politics of patronage” to “the politics of per-
formance”, in the words of Sir Michael Barber, a former advis-
er to the British government who now works with the Punja-
bis, would transform public services in poor countries.
Pakistan’s reforms have a long way to go. But they already have
many lessons to teach the world. 7

Amer ican politics

In praise of state-ism

Less centralised government promises to be better government
CALIFORNIA’S new laws lib-
eralising cannabis are a
good idea, but some of their pro-
visions read like a parody of 21st-
century liberalism. To right an
injustice—that brown people
were more likely than white
ones to be charged when the po-
lice found marijuana on them—Los Angeles plans to help
those with marijuana convictions set up pot shops. This ex-
periment may turn out to be a foolish mistake (see page 26). But
that, in a way, is the point. Congress ﬁnds it notoriously hard to
pass meaningful laws and ﬁnds it almost as hard to undo legis-
lation that has been on the books for a long time. Statehouses,
governors and mayors are more nimble. 
Sure enough, the Golden State is greeting 2018 with a host of
innovations. Firms with at least 20 employees will have to of-
fer them 12 weeks’ unpaid parental leave. Schools in poor areas
will have a legal duty to feed pupils whose parents cannot af-
ford meals. Elsewhere, Tennessee has a new law protecting
free-speech rights on campus. Washington now requires em-
ployers to provide paid sick leave. Such state-level energy is
welcome, partly because it generates useful policy innovation,
partly because it mitigates the trauma of a divided country. But
to succeed it demands a change of attitude from both parties.

Take 300mg of lithium
State activism is often confused with an argument that sounds
similar but is fundamentally diﬀerent. To many American
ears, the notion that states should do their own thing has an
echo of secession, the “states’ rights” defence of slavery made
before the civil war and the resistance to federal civil-rights
laws in the 1960s. To be clear: states do not have an innate right
to resist federal laws, which is why California’s position on im-

migration enforcement, which comes close to non-compli-
ance with the federal government, is mistaken. The federal
government does often need to step in on questions of funda-
mental importance, such as who can vote in elections. 
But in many areas, particularly in social policy, it makes
sense for the states to have plenty of leeway. When mistakes
are made, as they inevitably will be, the damage is limited to
the state or city that did the experimenting. When new laws do
succeed, they can be copied across the country. 
To this classic case for American-style federalism add a sec-
ond, newer beneﬁt. On presidential polling days America re-
mains almost a 50-50 nation, and the two halves grow further
apart every year. A highly centralised government cannot leg-
islate for such a place happily. Presidential elections have
come to resemble bipolar disorder. Half the country feels elat-
ed for four or eight years; then the other lot win, and a deep de-
pression sets in. Decentralisation works better, because more
voters get more of what they want for more of the time.
Yet for this idea to work calls for a sacriﬁce. Republicans,
most of whom claim to favour decentralisation when a Demo-
crat is in the White House, often then try to use federal power
to stop Democratic cities from doing as they please. Likewise,
Democrats often think that the federal government should
force people in Republican-leaning states to submit to social
change. Inconsistency and self-interest abound. Plenty of peo-
ple who hold, rightly, that California should be able to set its
own climate-change policies simultaneously object, wrongly,
to the Republicans’ incoming tax changes, which limit the fed-
eral rebates the rich in California and other states get on state
and local taxes (see page 24). 
State-ism has risks. Statehouses are cheaper and easier to
lobby than Congress is. America will become more complicat-
ed. But, at a time when voters feel that government fails them,
it oﬀers an inkling of progress. 7

Letters

China’s diplomatic approach

Your article on China’s “Sharp
power” (December 16th) was
based on the outdated belief
that international relations is a
zero-sum game. By describing
China’s normal economic
co-operation and cultural
exchanges with other coun-
tries as “subversion, bullying
and pressure” you turned a
blind eye to the abundant
opportunities brought about
by China’s pursuit of peaceful
development. This sheer preju-
dice is utterly unacceptable.
In the New Era of Socialism
with Chinese Characteristics,
China has increased the
options for developing coun-
tries to achieve modernisation.
Nevertheless, China will
always respect other nations’
choice of development model
and will never impose its will
upon others. President Xi
Jinping declared solemnly in
the report of the 19th National
Congress that China’s devel-
opment is no threat to other
countries and that China will
never seek expansion. China
opposes the old concept that
strength leads to hegemony.
Instead, China is committed to
blazing a trail, building a new
type of international relations
and a community with a
shared future for mankind
based on mutual respect,
equity, justice and win-win
co-operation. 
Countries are increasingly
more interconnected and
interdependent. Peaceful
development is an irreversible
trend. We wish that China-
watchers would replace pre-
sumptuous speculation and
arbitrary defamation with a
positive, healthy and peaceful
approach to China’s devel-
opment, which would contrib-
ute to greater mutual trust and
co-operation between China
and Western countries.

ZENG RONG

Spokesperson of the Chinese
embassy
London

It is a mistake to accept so
readily the National Endow-
ment for Democracy’s term
“sharp power”, as applied to
China’s approach to
diplomacy (“At the sharp end”,

December 16th). We already
have an adequate and better-
known label: “soft power”.
Countries deploy soft power
in the form of cultural
attraction and familiarity in
the belief that to know us is to
love us. That said, we should
not assume that soft power is
benign by deﬁnition. 
Soft power can have hard
characteristics, and this is
demonstrated most clearly in
China’s case. Culture and
values can and often do create
resentment and conﬂict. For a
society that sees a Hollywood
movie or programmes that
promote democracy as agents
of a foreign power’s propagan-
da or as cultural imperialism,
soft power is far from
non-coercive and non-threat-
ening. In fact soft power can be
more insidious than hard
power precisely because it can
be embedded and hidden
within cultural products and
aims to inﬂuence thought and
behaviour. In this case, to
know us may be to hate us or
fear us.
In other words, China’s
behaviour as described in
your article is soft power. It
aims to inﬂuence, persuade,
change opinion and behav-
iour, and to do so without
resorting to the instruments of
“hard” power. We do not need
yet more terms (not so long ago
the fashionable phrase was
“smart power”), but we do
need to recognise, as China
clearly does, the hard potential
of soft power.

GARY RAWNSLEY

Professor of public diplomacy
Aber ystwyth University

Dr Carson is doing well

I don’t agree with your assess-
ment that Ben Carson has
“stayed inconspicuous and
inscrutable” since taking up
the job of secretary of the
federal housing department
(“Dr Carson’s operation”,
December 2nd). Although Dr
Carson has not engaged in the
headline-hogging grandstand-
ing of his predecessor, Julian
Castro, he has been busy meet-
ing state and municipal hous-
ing leaders around the country
to get a ﬁrst-hand view of the
many problems facing the

housing market. Furthermore,
he has been very clear about
ﬁxing the dysfunctional nature
of the Department of Housing
and Urban Development,
which has spent too many
years allocating too much
money with too few results. 
Dr Carson wisely realises
that HUD needs an overhaul in
how it approaches the housing
market, but he knows better
than to rush for a quick-ﬁx
solution to a complex matter. It
is refreshing to have a cabinet
secretary who is willing to take
his time to get the right diagno-
sis rather than a career poli-
tician who only wants to call
attention to himself.

PHIL HALL

Managing editor
National Mor tgage Professional
Fairﬁeld, Connecticut

History repeating itself

You were right to recommend
David Goodhart’s “The Road
to Somewhere” as one of your
books of the year (December
9th). But I was recently struck
while reading “Howard’s End”
how well E.M. Forster captured
more than a hundred years ago
the emerging liberal, “any-
where” intelligences in the
form of the Schlegel family,
with their international,
cosmopolitan outlook and
commitment to justice, gender
equality and mobility. 
The contrast with the
conservative Wilcox family,
with their passion for empire
and belief in English superior-
ity, shows that the anywhere/
somewhere tensions run long
and deep. It was published in
the early 20th century, but
“Howard’s End” oﬀers refresh-
ingly modern insights of great
relevance today.

PAUL KEEN

Sheﬃeld

The Economist Januar y 6th 2018 11

The meaning of meat

The companies trying to ban
“meat names” from plant-
based food are simply demon-
strating how threatened they
are (“I can’t believe it’s not
meat”, December 2nd). Con-
sumers are choosing animal-
free versions of meat that
provide the fat, salt, ﬂavour,
familiarity and texture with-
out the cruelty. Shoppers
know the diﬀerence between a
veggie version and an animal-
ﬂesh one. Words change,
context matters.
More than that, the etymol-
ogy of these words reveal that
they have less to do with the
animals than we think: schnit-
zel comes from a Germanic
root, meaning “to cut, slice”;
wurst comes from the same
Germanic, meaning “to mix
up”; sausage derives from the
Latin word for “salted”. Even
the original connotation of
“meat” was “food in general”.
We still use that sense today, in
sweetmeat, coconut meat, the
meat of a nut, and so on. 

COLLEEN PATRICK-GOUDREAU

Oakland, California

Political botany

It could well be true, according
to a recent book, that people
working in the Trump cam-
paign “wouldn’t know the
diﬀerence between a caucus
and a cactus” (Lexington,
December 9th). But that
distinction was once clearly
articulated by a man who
lived among both: the late Mo
Udall, a congressman from
Arizona. 
Upon losing a leadership
vote at a caucus of Democratic
members of Congress, he
stated clearly to reporters that
he had indeed learned what
the diﬀerence is: on a cactus, all
the pricks are on the outside. 

PROFESSOR ROBERT LOUIS 
POWELL III

University of California, Davis 7

Letters are welcome and should be
addressed to the Editor at 
The Economist, The Adelphi Building,
1-11 John Adam Street, 

London WC2N 6HT

E-mail: letters@economist.com
More letters are available at:

Economist.com/letters

12

Executive Focus

DIRECTOR (D-1)

Duty Station: Tokyo, Japan

The United Nations University (UNU) is an international community of scholars, 
engaged in research, postgraduate teaching, capacity development, and 
dissemination of knowledge in furtherance of the purposes and principles of the 
Charter of the United Nations.

The Institution: The UNU Institute for the Advanced Study of Sustainability 
(UNU-IAS) is a leading research and teaching institute dedicated to advancing 
efforts towards a more sustainable future. The Institute serves the international 
community and contributes to UN debates by offering policy-oriented research 
and capacity development that addresses the socioeconomic and environmental 
dimensions of sustainability. 

The Position: The Director is the chief academic and administrative ofﬁ cer of 
UNU-IAS.

Qualiﬁ cations: The Director should: have academic qualiﬁ cations that lend to 
UNU-IAS prestige in the international scholarly community; guarantee scientiﬁ c 
excellence; and provide leadership and guidance for the institute’s activities.

Experience: A doctoral qualiﬁ cation in a relevant discipline. Strong research 
background and publications in sustainable development. Research supervision 
experience. Strong and demonstrable international fundraising skills. Effective 
leadership in administration and research programming. Sound ﬁ nancial and 
human resource management skills. Gender, cultural and political sensitivity. 
Commitment to the 2030 Development Agenda. 

Fluency in English is required. Fluency in ofﬁ cial UN languages is desirable.

Application deadline: 31 January 2018

Full details of the position and how to apply: 
https://unu.edu/about/hr/academic/director-4.html#overview

 The OPEC Fund for International Development (OFID)

The OPEC Fund for International Development (OFID), based in Vienna – 
Austria, is the development fi nance institution established by the Member States 
of OPEC in 1976 as a collective channel of aid to the developing countries. OFID 
works in cooperation with developing country partners and the international 
donor community to stimulate economic growth and alleviate poverty in 
all disadvantaged regions of the world. To date, OFID has made fi nancial 
commitments of more than US$ 21.4 billion to over 3,700 operations across 134 
countries worldwide.

In pursuit of its Organizational Strengthening Program, OFID has openings and 
seeks to fi ll the following vacancies:
i. Director, Human Resources Policies and Planning Unit (VA511/2018)
ii. Head, Risk Management Function (VA3002/2017)  
iii. Public Sector Operations Offi cer (VA707/2018)
iv. Private Sector and Trade Finance Operations Offi cer (VA604/2018)
v. 
Investment Offi cer (VA106/2017)
vi. Human Resources Offi cer (VA504/2018)
vii. Computer System Offi cer – SAP Specialist (VA2000/2017)

OFID offers an internationally competitive remuneration and benefi ts package, 
which includes tax- exempt salary, dependent children education grant, 
relocation grant, home leave allowance, medical and accident insurance schemes, 
dependency allowance, annual leave, staff retirement benefi t, diplomatic 
immunity and privileges, as applicable.

Interested applicants are invited to visit OFID’s website at www.ofi d.org for 
detailed descriptions of duties and required qualifi cations, as well as procedure 
for applications. Preference is given to applicants from OFID Member Countries.

The deadline for receipt of applications is January 27, 2018.

Due to the expected volume of applications, OFID would only enter into further 
correspondence with short-listed candidates.

The Economist Januar y 6th 2018

Br ieﬁng Education in Pakistan

The Economist Januar y 6th 2018 13

Stepping up

K A R A C H I A N D L A H O R E

Pakistan is home to the most frenetic education reforms in the world
EVERY three months, Shahbaz Sharif, the
a dozen children aged six or seven sit be-
chief minister of Punjab, gathers educa-
hind desks in a cobwebbed classroom. Not
tion oﬃcials around a large rectangular ta-
one is wearing a uniform; most have no
ble. The biggest of Pakistan’s four prov-
schoolbags; some have no shoes. There is
inces, larger in terms of population (110m)
not a teacher in sight.
than all but 11 countries, Punjab is reform-
Most Pakistani children who start
ing its schools at a pace rarely seen any-
school drop out by the age of nine; just 3%
where in the world. In April 2016, as part of
of those starting public school graduate
its latest scheme, private providers took
from 12th grade, the ﬁnal year. Girls from
over the running of 1,000 of the govern-
poor families are least likely to attend (see
ment’s primary schools. Today the num-
chart on next page); Pakistan’s gap be-
ber is 4,300. By the end of this year, Mr Sha-
tween girls’ and boys’ enrolment is, after
rif has decreed, it will be 10,000. The
Afghanistan’s, the widest in South Asia.
quarterly “stocktakes” are his chance to
Those in school learn little. Only about
hear what progress is being made towards
half of Pakistanis who complete ﬁve years
this and other targets—and whether the
of primary school are literate. In rural Paki-
radical overhaul is having any eﬀect. 
stan just over two-ﬁfths of third-grade stu-
For oﬃcials it can be a tough ride. Lead-
dents, typically aged 8 or 9, have enough
ers of struggling districts are called to La-
grasp of arithmetic to subtract 25 from 54.
hore for what Allah Bakhsh Malik, Pun-
Unsurprisingly, many parents have turned
jab’s education secretary, calls a “pep talk”.
away from the system. There are roughly
Asked what
that entails, he responds:
68,000 private schools in Pakistan (about
“Four words: F-I-R-E. It is survival of the ﬁt-
one-third of all schools), up from 49,000 in
test.” About 30% of district heads have
2007. Private money currently pays for
been sacked for poor results in the past
more of Pakistan’s education than the gov-
nine months, says Mr Malik. “We are work-
ernment does.
ing at Punjabi speed.”
It is in part the spread of private options
Pakistani education has long been atro-
that has spurred politicians like Mr Sharif
cious. A government-run school on the
into action. The outsourcing of schools to
outskirts of Karachi, in the province of
entrepreneurs and charities is on the rise
Sindh, is perhaps the bleakest your corre-
across the country. It is too early to judge
spondent has ever seen. A little more than
the results of this massive shake up, but it

seems better than the lamentable status
quo. If this wholesale reform makes real in-
roads into the problems of enrolment,
quality and discrimination against girls
that bedevil Pakistan, it may prove a tem-
plate for other countries similarly aﬄicted. 
There are many reasons for the old sys-
tem’s failure. From 2007-15 there were 867
attacks by Islamist terrorists on education-
al institutions, according to the Global Ter-
rorism Database run by the University of
Maryland. When it controlled the Swat riv-
er valley in the north of the country, the
Pakistani Taliban closed hundreds of girls’
schools. When the army retook the area it
occupied dozens of them itself. 
Poverty also holds children back. Faced
with a choice between having a child help
in the ﬁelds or learn nothing at school,
many parents rationally pick the former.
The diﬀerence in enrolment between chil-
dren of the richest and poorest ﬁfth of
households is greater in Pakistan than in all
but two of the 96 developing countries re-
cently analysed by the World Bank. 
Yet poverty is not the decisive factor.
Teaching is. Research by Jishnu Das of the
World Bank and colleagues has found that
the school a child in rural Pakistan attends
is many times more important in explain-
ing test scores than either the parents’ in-
come or their level of literacy. In a paper
published in 2016, Mr Das and Natalie Bau
of the University of Toronto studied the
performance of teachers in Punjab be-
tween 2003 and 2007 who were hired on
temporary contracts. It turned out that
their pupils did no worse than those taught
by regular ones, despite the temporary
teachers often being comparatively inex-
perienced and paid 35% less. 

1

14 Br ieﬁng Education in Pakistan

2

Teachers’ salaries account for at least
87% of the education budget in Pakistan’s
provinces. A lot of that money is complete-
ly wasted. Pakistan’s political parties hand
out teaching jobs as a way of recruiting
election workers and rewarding allies.
Some teachers pay for the job: 500,000 ru-
pees ($4,500) was once the going rate in
Sindh. At the peak of the problem a few
years ago, an estimated 40% of teachers in
the province were “ghosts”, pocketing a
salary and not turning up. 
“Pupils’ learning outcomes are not po-
litically important in Pakistan,” says the
leader of a large education organisation.
Graft is not the only problem. Politicians
have treated schools with a mix of neglect
and capriciousness. Private schools have
been nationalised (1972) and denational-
ised (1979); Islam has been inserted and re-
moved as the main part of the curriculum.
The language of instruction has varied,
too; Punjab changed from Urdu to English,
only to revert to Urdu. Sindh, where teach-
ers who are often Sindhi speakers may
struggle to teach Urdu, announced in 2011
that Mandarin would be compulsory in
secondary schools. 

Getting schooled
It is against this background that organisa-
tions like The Citizens Foundation (TCF)
have developed. The charity runs perhaps
the largest network of independently run
schools in the world, educating 204,000
pupils at not-for-proﬁt schools. It is also
Pakistan’s largest single employer of wom-
en outside the public sector; in an eﬀort to
make girls feel safer in class, all of TCF’s
12,000 teachers are female. At its Shirin Sul-
tan Dossa branch near a slum on the out-
skirts of Karachi, one girl is more than hold-
ing her own. At break-time on the
makeshift cricket pitch she is knocking
boys’ spin-bowling out of the playground. 
In 2016 TCF opened its ﬁrst “college” for
17- and 18-year-olds at this campus in an at-
tempt to keep smart poor pupils in school
longer. Every day it buses 400 college pu-
pils in from around the city. It builds
schools using a standard template, typical-
ly raising about $250,000 for each of them
from donors; it recruits and trains teachers;
and it writes its own curriculums. 
Since 2015 TCF has taken over the run-
ning of more than 250 government schools
in Punjab, Sindh and Khyber Pakh-
tunkhwa. It gets a subsidy of around 715 ru-
pees per month per child, which it tops up
with donations. So far it has increased av-
erage enrolment at schools from 47 to 101
pupils, and test results have improved.
The outsourcing of state schools to TCF
is just one part of the Sindh government’s
recent reforms. “Three years ago we hit
rock bottom,” says a senior bureaucrat,
noting that 14,000 teaching jobs had been
doled out in one year to supporters of the
ruling Pakistan Peoples Party. Since then it

Dropping out

Pakistan, youths* who have completed each
school year, by wealth quintile, 2012, %

Richest

Middle

Poorest

Girls in poorest quintile

100

80

60

40

20

0

4

5

6

1

2

3

School year
Source: World Bank

7

8

9

*Aged 15-19

has used a biometric attendance register to
cut 6,000 ghost teachers from the payrolls,
and merged 4,000 sparsely attended
schools into 1,350. Through the Sindh Edu-
cation Foundation, an arms-length gov-
ernment body, it is funding “public-private
partnerships” covering 2,414 schools and
653,265 pupils. As well as the outsourcing
programme, schemes subsidise poor chil-
dren to attend cheap private schools and
pay entrepreneurs to set up new ones in
underserved areas. 
This policy was evaluated in a paper by
Felipe Barrera-Osorio of Harvard Universi-
ty and colleagues published last August.
The researchers found that in villages as-
signed to the scheme, enrolment increased
by 30% and test scores improved. Parents
raised their aspirations—they started want-
ing daughters to become teachers, rather
than housewives. These results were
achieved at a per-pupil cost comparable to
that of government schools. “Pakistan’s
education challenge is not underspending.
It is misspending,” says Nadia Naviwala of
the Wilson Centre, a think-tank.
While Sindh has pioneered many poli-
cies, Punjab has taken them furthest. The
Punjab Education Foundation (PEF), an-
other quasi-independent body, oversees
some of the largest school-privatisation
and school-voucher programmes in the
world. It has a seat with the ministers and
administrators at Mr Sharif’s quarterly
meetings. The Punjab government no lon-

     KHYBER PAKHTUNKHWA

                     by
               Pakistan)

78

FEDERALLY ADMINISTERED
TRIBAL AREAS

A FGHAN I S TAN

62
Islamabad

P A K I S T A N

B A L O C H I S T A N

I R A N

67

42

Karachi

A r a b i a n
S e a

300 km

67

54

S I N D H

Lahore
P U N J A B

73

67

IND IA

Pr imar y
education net
enrolment ratio

2014-15, %
Pakistan total
Male

I N D I A

72

62

Female

Source: Pakistan
Bureau of Statistics

The Economist Januar y 6th 2018

ger opens new schools; all growth is via
these privately operated schools. Schools
overseen by PEF now teach more than 3m
children (an additional 11m or so remain in
ordinary government-run schools). 
This use of the private sector is coupled
with the command-and-control of Mr Sha-
rif, who is backed by Britain’s Department
for International Development, which
helps pay for support from McKinsey, a
consultancy, and Sir Michael Barber, who
ran British prime minister Tony Blair’s “De-
livery unit”. The latest stocktake claimed
an “unprecedented” 10% increase in prim-
ary-school enrolment since September
2016, an extra 68,000 teachers selected “on
merit”, and a steady increase in the share
of correct answers on a biannual test of lit-
eracy and numeracy. 
Some are concerned about the stress on
meeting targets in this “deliverology” mod-
el. For one thing, independent assessment
of the system’s claimed success is hard. Mr
Das argues that there is no evidence from
public sources that support Punjab’s
claims of improved enrolment since 2010.
Nor is the fear provoked by Mr Sharif al-
ways conducive to frank self-appraisal:
some oﬃcials may fudge the numbers. Ms
Naviwala points out that two of the worst-
performing districts in spring 2015 some-
how became the highest performers a few
months later. She suggests that similar
data-driven reforms in Khyber Pakh-
tunkhwa may have a better chance of suc-
cess, since they are less dependent on the
whims of a single minister. For their part
Punjab and its international backers insist
that the data are accurate, and that the oth-
er publicly available data are out of date. 
No one thinks that everything is ﬁxed.
Around the corner from that parlous prim-
ary school on the outskirts of Karachi is an-
other, privately run school hand-picked for
your correspondent’s visit by civil ser-
vants. In maths classes pupils’ workbooks
have no entries for the past fortnight. What
sums there are show no working; answers
were simply copied. The head teacher
seems to care most about his new audio-
visual room, the screen in which is not for
pupils, but for him: a bootleg Panopticon,
with six CCTV feeds displayed on a wall-
mounted screen. This is an eﬀective way of
dealing with ghosts. But as the head ex-
plains how great his teachers are, one of
them strolls up to a boy in the front of her
class and smacks him over the head.
Even if there is bluster aplenty and a
long way to go, though, the fact that politi-
cians are burnishing their reputations
through public services, rather than pa-
tronage alone, is a step forward. And if
there is a little Punjabi hype to go with the
Punjabi speed, then that may be a price
worth paying. For too long Pakistani chil-
dren have suﬀered because politicians
have treated schools as political tools.
They deserve much better. 7

Asia

Religion in South-East Asia

Escalators to heaven

B A N D U N G A N D S I N G A P O R E

The Chinese of South-East Asia are turning to evangelical Christianity
WHEN Pastor Jimmy Parade took over
ing among the Muslim majority is well
at the Indonesian Reformed Evan-
nigh impossible, but where Buddhists,
gelical Church in Bandung, on the island of
Confucians and Christians of other de-
Java, ﬁve years ago, around 180 people
nominations, almost all of them ethnically
came to services each week. Now the
Chinese, are proving receptive.
church—in a nondescript building in an
In Singapore, which is sandwiched be-
outdoor shopping complex—is packed
tween Indonesia and Malaysia but
is
with around 450 each Sunday. “People
mainly Chinese, evangelicalism ﬁrst took
keep coming,” Mr Parade shrugs.
oﬀ in the 1980s, recalls Terence Chong of
the ISEAS–Yusof Ishak Institute, a think-
Some 1,000 miles away, up several sets
of escalators at a shopping mall in Singa-
tank. Mega-churches began springing up in
pore, thousands of people take part in a
the early 1990s. These grew quickly, despite
two-hour service on a Saturday evening at
the fact that the Singaporean government
the City Harvest Church, which has a
is wary of proselytisers potentially stirring
weekly attendance of just under 16,000.
up religious tensions. Evangelicals, includ-
The service involves a rock group leading
the congregation in devotional songs, sev-
eral instances of speaking in tongues, and
testimony from Emily, a young Singapor-
ean who converted her father to Christian-
ity. “My Dad has become a much happier
man,” she declares, to huge applause.
Evangelical and Pentecostal Christian-
ity is growing more quickly in Asia than
most parts of the world, with over 200m
adherents in 2015, up from 17m in 1970. The
largest congregations are in South Korea
and the Philippines, where dazzlingly large
mega-churches hold tens of thousands of
people. But Christian zeal is also increasing
in other parts of the continent, including
Indonesia and Malaysia, where proselytis-

Evangelical, pentecostal
and char ismatic Chr istians

Source: World Chr istian Database

Hallelujah

As % of total population

Indonesia
Myanmar

8

6

4

2

0

Total ,
2015, m

0.5

18.8

2.7
1.3

Singapore

10

Malaysia

1970

2000

2015

The Economist Januar y 6th 2018 15

Also in this section
16 Feudalism in Pakistan
17 Japan’s bor ing public broadcaster
18 Child abuse in the Philippines
19 Banyan: Kim v Trump, round two

For daily analysis and debate on Asia, visit
Economist.com/asia

ing many Pentecostals, made up 8% of the
population in 2015, up from 2% in 1970. 
Evangelical churches are ﬂourishing in
Malaysia and Indonesia in even less pro-
mising circumstances. Roughly a tenth of
the population of both countries is Chris-
tian, but bureaucrats make life diﬃcult for
churches, largely for fear that they will at-
tempt to convert members of the Muslim
majority. Over 1,000 churches were closed
in Indonesia between 2006 and 2014, says
Andreas Harsono of Human Rights Watch,
a pressure group. 
Mr Parade’s church is in an outdoor
shopping complex because it doesn’t need
a licence to operate there, and getting one
elsewhere is diﬃcult. In Malaysia, mean-
while, it is illegal for a Muslim to convert to
Christianity, even though the constitution
theoretically enshrines freedom of reli-
gion. Malaysia also has Islamic police to
make sure Muslims do not marry adher-
ents of other religions or deviate in other
ways. Yet even in this forbidding setting,
the proportion of the population that is
evangelical has grown rapidly (see chart).
The growth of evangelical churches in
the three countries also shows how they
are “increasingly connected”, says Max Je-
ganathan of the Zacharias Trust, a Chris-
tian organisation based in Britain. Chris-
tians across the region support each other
ﬁnancially, he says; several churches in Sin-
gapore have helped “plant” others in Ma-
laysia or elsewhere. City Harvest declares
that it provides training and “spiritual
oversight” to locals keen to start their own
churches. It now has over three dozen aﬃl-
iated churches abroad.
Most evangelicals see the growth of
their churches as God’s work. But it also
seems to have an aspirational element to it.

1

16 Asia

2 “It is the de facto middle-class religion right
now,” says Mr Chong. According to a study
he conducted in 2013, over 50% of mega-
church-goers had a university degree, a
higher proportion than Christians of other
sorts. That was in spite of the fact that
mega-church Christians were more likely
to have lived in public housing and to
come from working-class backgrounds.
They were also more likely to speak Chi-
nese and to come from families which
were not previously Christian.
Many of South-East Asia’s mega-
churches preach an American-style “pros-
perity gospel”: although there is lots of talk
of charity and good works, wealth is cele-
brated as a gift from God. At City Harvest
one preacher tells the story of a business-
man who attended the church—and do-
nated generously to it—whose sales went
up by 40% in a year and whose proﬁts dou-
bled. Presentation is often slick: at the New
Creation Church, another mega-church in
a mall in Singapore, ﬁrst-time visitors are
given a pop-up book telling the story of the
venue. The 30,000 worshippers there have
to book online on a Wednesday to reserve
a seat for the Sunday service. 
Friendly ushers and peppy slogans
(“too blessed to be stressed”) make the
churches appealingly accessible. They are
also good spots for making business con-
nections. Churches in Singapore are places
where people network with those they
trust, says Thomas Harvey of the Oxford
Centre of Mission Studies, a British charity.
The feeling is that “these are people we
know, these are people of integrity, charac-
ter, education,” he says.
Integrity, alas, is sometimes lacking. In
2015 Kong Hee, the founder of City Harvest
Church, and ﬁve other church leaders were
found guilty of misappropriating S$50m
($37m) in church funds, partly to fund the
music career of Mr Kong’s wife, Ho Yeow
Sun. (The devotional element of the song
“China Wine”, in the video for which a
scantily clad Ms Ho “grinds it up” with as-
sorted rappers, is hard to fathom.) In 2009
a well-publicised spat broke out at the Cal-
vary Church in Kuala Lumpur, with con-
gregants demanding more transparency
over church funds. At other churches pas-
tors have been accused of accumulating
unseemly riches.
This has hurt some churches. At City
Harvest the congregation is around a third
smaller than it used to be, estimates Sam, a
36-year-old interior designer who has been
going to the church for 15 years. But on the
whole churches have been able to “isolate
incidents”, says Mr Chong, putting the
blame on the individual rather than the
whole church or
community. “With
enough prayer,” the argument goes, he
says, “the Church will be able to right it-
self.” And if not, there are plenty of com-
petitors to take in disenchanted members
of another ﬂock. 7

Feudalism in Pakistan

Quail, cotton and
contumacy

B A H AW A L N A G A R

The power of the landlords is fading,
but painfully slowly
PANICKED from its nest, a quail scuds
low across a cotton-ﬁeld. The hunters
spin round and blast away. As the bird
drops from the sky, a gang of poor boys in
plastic ﬂip-ﬂops races through the mud,
ﬁghting to pick up the kill. This vignette of
feudal life has hardly changed in a century,
except for one thing, says Ehtehsham La-
leka, a puckish 30-year-old, whose family
owns 7,000 acres of land in this southern
region of Punjab province. “In my grandfa-
ther’s day we would have had hundreds of
beaters like them.”
Feudalism, a curse that has lingered
since independence in 1947, is often seen as
the biggest blight on Pakistan’s develop-
ment. In the old days the zamindars (land-
owners), empowered by British rule,
lorded over great tracts of land, housing
serfs and often abusing them in return for
sharecropping and other forms of menial
labour. Whereas independent India rid it-
self of much of that feudal class, Pakistan’s
feeble attempts at land reform were ruled
un-Islamic by its Supreme Court in 1990.
The landowners turned their economic
power into political authority, coercing
their tenants to vote for them. In 1970 feu-
dal landlords held 42% of the seats in the
national parliament.
Modern feudals like to portray them-
selves as benevolent paternalists, but this
does not stretch far. Feudal areas have the
lowest literacy in Pakistan. On the estate of
one family, many of whose members were
educated in the West, the village children’s

The Economist Januar y 6th 2018

teeth are black and rotten. Families like the
Lalekas, and 101 others listed in one cata-
logue, still pop up frequently as villains in
soap operas.
Yet their power is wilting. By one count,
feudal representation in parliament has
dropped to around a quarter, drawn main-
ly from rural areas in south Punjab and the
province of Sindh. On a stroll through his
family stables, Mr Laleka shakes his head
at the cost of maintaining dozens of buﬀalo
and horses, on which little more than sta-
tus rides. “You can get cheaper milk in the
markets,” he sighs. “And you don’t have to
clean up their shit.” This shows how the
economy is changing. Agriculture’s share
in GDP has dived from 53% in 1947 to 20%.
Rapid urbanisation is drawing millions
away from areas like south Punjab. 
Meanwhile feuding has become a pas-
time of the feudal class, as Islamic inheri-
tance laws requiring an equal split among
male heirs fragment estates. “Eighty per
cent of my friends have taken out loans,”
mourns one landowner, himself indebted,
to keep themselves in the ﬁnery to which
they are accustomed. In 1960 farms smaller
than ﬁve acres made up 19% of the total. By
2010, that ﬁgure had soared to 65%. 
The landlords’ power over labourers is
dwindling, too. Cash is replacing the old in-
formal system of payment in kind. Erst-
while serfs are now paid around $170 a
month at harvest time. Violence against
them has become harder to get away with.
When a feudal lord threw a ten-year-old
boy into a thresher in 2013, severing both
his arms, the outcry on social media led to
his arrest, although not his conviction. Al-
lahdad, a landlord built like a giant, fondly
recalls the days when he beat lorry drivers
and shaved their moustaches as a punish-
ment. “If you cannot beat them, they
steal,” he says, laughing. But a neighbour
whispers that Allahdad can no longer re-
tain a cook or guard, as the staﬀ he used to 

1

If you can’t beat them, pay them

The Economist Januar y 6th 2018 

2 slap around can now use their cash wages
to escape.
Feudal politicians also have to work
harder for their constituents’ votes. A
young politician from a landed family
glumly describes his view of the job. “Poli
means many and tics means bloodsuck-
ers,” he laments. When he is not glad-
handing the masses at weddings or funer-
als, he must badger local administrators on
behalf of his voters. Despite his help, he
says, “they may have to bribe a policeman,
but not as much.”
Nonetheless, the feudal rump in parlia-
ment has been able to prevent the exten-
sion of the minimum wage to agricultural
labourers, among other things. Imran
Khan, a leader of the opposition, blames
feudalism for the country’s “grossly unfair
social system”, but is now wooing the feu-
dal barons in his bid for power in next
year’s election. And even feudalism’s slow
death may not lead to much change. 
Though the power of the landlords is
fading, more than half the members of
Punjab’s assembly have inherited their
seats from relatives, more than twice the
rate in India’s parliament. The canniest
“feudals”, says Badar Alam, editor of a cur-
rent-aﬀairs magazine, have long since
morphed or married into the rising indus-
trial class. These new rich families may not
diﬀer much from their landed predeces-
sors. Noting how they like to copy the old
feudal style, with big cars, browbeaten ser-
vants and brazen tax avoidance, Mr Laleka
calls them “pseudo-feudals”. 7

Japan’s broadcaster

Snoringly boring

T O K Y O

NHK extracts a hefty fee from all
viewers for dull fare many don’t watch
T RY saying you don’t live there, suggests
one website. Pretend you don’t have a
television, says another. Such is the advice
swapped online on how to avoid paying
the “reception fee” that every home that
owns a television must pay to NHK, Ja-
pan’s public-service broadcaster. The ex-
cuses may have to get more inventive: on
December 6th Japan’s highest court ruled
that the fee is constitutional, and found
against a man who had refused to pay for
the past 11 years.
Almost 80% of households paid last
year, stumping up ¥13,990 ($125) for an or-
dinary television or ¥24,770 for one with a
satellite dish. That is a rise of nine percent-
age points compared with a decade ago,
thanks in no small part to NHK’s army of
private collectors, who are schooled in the
art of strong-arm tactics to go door-to-door.

Look: another mid-ranking oﬃcial! 

Many people refuse to pay because they
don’t watch NHK, often out of distaste for
its pandering to the government.
NHK, whose initials stand for Japan
Broadcasting Corporation, has hardly
changed since Ellis Krauss, an academic,
spent years researching it in the 1990s. He
described its news as “the world’s most
boring”. It still reports facts with scant anal-
ysis—its oﬃcious interpretation of neutral-
ity—and gives dreary attention to bureau-
crats and politicians. Journalists who try to
be too independent or inventive are cold-
shouldered; those who go too far can ex-
pect to be sent to the archives.
The corporation hit a nadir in 2013
when Katsuto Momii was appointed as its
head. In his ﬁrst press conference he re-
marked that Japan’s use of wartime sex
slaves in territories it conquered was not
unusual. He appeared to see NHK as a pub-
lic-relations agency for the authorities.
“We cannot turn left when the govern-
ment says right,” he memorably opined.
NHK was criticised particularly for its toa-
dying reporting of the government’s line
after the meltdown of the Fukushima nuc-
lear power plant in 2011. Anti-nuclear prot-
ests were all but ignored.
Then came a raft of prominent report-
ers being removed. Kensuke Okoshi, the
liberal-minded anchor of the evening
news, left in 2015 after questioning the gov-
ernment’s love of nuclear energy. A year
later Hiroko Kuniya, presenter of “Close
Up Gendai”, a popular news programme,
met a similar fate, presumably thanks to
her daringly robust questioning of the gov-
ernment spokesperson.
Things have improved since Mr Mo-
mii’s term expired at the start of 2017, but “it
takes a long time for wounds to heal”, says
a former NHK journalist. The underlying
causes of NHK’s often timorous reporting

Asia 17

remain, says Yasuo Onuki, who retired a
few years ago after four decades there. 
One reason for its cosy relations with
government is that Japan, uniquely among
democracies, has been ruled by the same
lot, the Liberal Democratic Party, for all but
three years of the past six decades. “They
have tamed the media,” says Kaori Haya-
shi of Tokyo University. Chummy agree-
ments between the government and re-
porters’ clubs have led to access to press
events being restricted to the big domestic
media, with foreigners and freelances gen-
erally excluded.
In theory NHK is independent. Unlike
Britain’s BBC, it collects the reception fee it-
self. Its boss is appointed by its board of go-
vernors. But the prime minister appoints
the board and Japan’s parliament ap-
proves its budget. In 2013 Shinzo Abe chose
a clutch of governors with distinctly con-
servative views of women and Japan’s
wartime history. The UN and Reporters
Without Borders, a French-based organisa-
tion that promotes freedom of the press,
now repeatedly chastise Japan for its me-
dia’s lack of independence. Oﬃcials put
out by NHK’s coverage sometimes sum-
mon its staﬀ to berate them. It is still taboo
for the organisation to question the monar-
chy or Japan’s wartime deeds.
As much to blame, says Ms Hayashi, is
the way Japanese journalism is practised.
The country has a large and noisy mass
media, but from their origin after the sec-
ond world war they have co-operated with
the government in promoting national de-
velopment rather than acting as the fourth
estate. Self-censorship is common. NHK’s
style book for its international TV and ra-
dio tells journalists to avoid certain terms
when discussing “comfort women”—those
forced to have sex with Japanese soldiers.
They should refer to the Rape of Nanjing
by Japanese troops in 1937 as an “incident”,
not a “massacre”, though the death toll ri-
valled those of the atomic bombs dropped
on Hiroshima and Nagasaki.
In that sense NHK hardly diﬀers from
other Japanese media. All the same, the
country would be poorer without it, says
the former journalist. It makes excellent
documentaries. It had the scoop in 2016 of
a video in which the emperor hinted at
wishing (much to the government’s cha-
grin) to step down. It remains the country’s
most trusted outlet. It is the go-to station in
times of natural disasters, the sole broad-
caster of sumo and the source of the most
accurate exit polls. 
But Japanese disapprove of the broad-
caster’s attempts to subject ever more peo-
ple to its fees. It now wants those who
watch its content online to cough up, draw-
ing criticism even from former oﬃcials. If
NHK cannot persuade people to pay vo-
luntarily for its programmes (for example,
by making more interesting ones), why
should they be forced to? 7

The Economist Januar y 6th 2018

is to allow police to use it to ensnare
would-be customers in chat rooms. Mr
Guyt says that a recent six-week pilot pro-
ject conducted by the Philippine police
was a big success. The Australian authori-
ties and Interpol, a group through which
the world’s police forces co-operate, are in-
terested too. But once wrongdoers have
been identiﬁed with the help of the avatar,
legal complexities stemming from the in-
ternational nature of the online interac-
tions mean that the police can only issue a
warning message. 
Several countries, including America,
Britain, Canada and Israel, as well the Phil-
ippines, are modifying their laws in re-
sponse to the jurisdictional morass of on-
line horrors. Indeed, lawmakers around
the world are taking the problem of child
pornography increasingly seriously. In
2006 just 27 countries had enacted strong
legislation to combat it. That number had
risen to 82 a decade later, according to the
International Centre for Missing and Ex-
ploited Children, a charity.
There is much more to do. The age of
sexual consent in the Philippines, for in-
stance, is just 12. Raising it to 16 would also
allow those creating pornography involv-
ing young teenagers to be punished for
rape rather than prostitution (which car-
ries less severe penalties). Congress is con-
sidering just such a measure. 
But it is more humble interventions that
the former victims at the Centre of Hope
consider most useful. They say raising
awareness among young people, by visit-
ing schools and giving talks, makes a big
diﬀerence. They also set store by attempts
to suppress demand. Some of them have
travelled to rich countries to help draw at-
tention to the problem. One enjoyed a trip
to America to tell her story so much that
she now wants to be a ﬂight attendant. Not
all victims escape with such optimism. 7

can communicate easily with clients. The
swift spread of the internet, to which 55%
of Filipinos now have access, up from 9% in
2009, means cybersex dens can operate in
increasingly remote areas. Widespread
mistrust of the police discourages both cy-
bersex victims and those who suspect
wrongdoing from asking for their help.
And a higher proportion of people in the
Philippines use methamphetamines or
amphetamines than in any other country
in Asia. Those addicts are sometimes will-
ing to resort to abhorrent means to fund
their habit. 
The problem is too big to be solved
through arrests alone. The police break up
big cybersex dens to much fanfare every
few months, but smaller operations carry
on without being detected. Some young-
sters even want to enter the business inde-
pendently; there are cybercafés that will-
ingly host
them. Another means of
stopping the exploitation is to pursue those
paying for horriﬁc content. Many come
from rich countries such as Australia and
America. After online encounters ar-
ranged by her father, one woman at the
Centre of Hope was eventually sold
abroad to a Danish man, who tortured her
by burning her with cigarettes. 
Technology allows the authorities bet-
ter ways of tracking down consumers in
faraway places. Terre des Hommes, for ex-
ample, has created an online avatar of a
child using artiﬁcial intelligence. The idea

18 Asia

Child abuse in the Philippines

Caught in the web

M A N I L A

The archipelago is a global hub for child pornography
“AT FIRST he was very kind, just like an
angel,” says a 19-year-old of the man
who recruited her into the Philippines’ cy-
bersex industry, “but at the end he was
evil.” The end took ﬁve years to come. One
of a dozen siblings, she left her poor family
on the island of Mindanao with a pimp
who had promised her an education. In-
stead, she was made to cavort in front of
web cameras. “I didn’t know that I would
be a cybersex model,” she says. Six other
children were part of the den, two of them
just toddlers. Sent to schools where they
improved their English, the children re-
ceived money for beauty products and
treatments, so as to present themselves
more alluringly to “customers”. 
Similar stories abound in the Centre of
Hope, a clean, bright shelter for children
just outside Manila. It is adorned with lan-
terns and trees for Christmas; teachers, so-
cial workers and psychologists are among
those who attend its festive parties. Resi-
dents, most of them teenagers, sleep in
bunk beds in dormitories that they tidy
themselves. The shelter lies hidden behind
an unmarked gate. This is so that criminal
gangs and, in some cases, family members
who have made money by exploiting the
50 girls and one boy who live at the facility
cannot ﬁnd it.
Sherryl Loseno of the Visayan Forum
Foundation, the charity that runs the cen-
tre, says the problem of online exploitation
is worse than ever before. Of the billions of
online searches for pornography that oc-
cur around the world each month, those
involving children account for just a tiny
proportion. But that still creates a lucrative
business opportunity for the immoral.
Hans Guyt from Terre des Hommes, a
Dutch charity which researches online sex-
ual abuse, says that accurate information
on the number of victims in the Philip-
pines is impossible to obtain. But he be-
lieves that the situation is growing more se-
rious in the country, not least because the
content being made there is more de-
praved than ever. Photographs, videos and
live-streaming now more commonly fea-
ture animals, toddlers and sometimes
even babies.
Experts believe the Philippines is a glo-
bal hub for the production of such materi-
al. Historical, technological and social fac-
tors help to explain why. The high level of
proﬁciency in English, a relic of the coun-
try’s time as an American colony, means
that both children and those abusing them

The ones that got away

The Economist Januar y 6th 2018 

Banyan

Peninsular wars

Asia 19

Though sanctions may bite at last in 2018, they will not bring Kim Jong Un to heel

prosperous country”. Mr Kim has long promoted a strategy of
byungjin—pursuing military and economic development at the
same time. Arguably, this has worked until now, with annual eco-
nomic growth reckoned to be around 4%. Yet Mr Kim warned of
“diﬃcult living conditions” this year. 
Economic trouble seems all too likely, thanks partly to tight-
ened sanctions which the UN Security Council passed, at Ameri-
can urging, on December 22nd. To date, a decade’s worth of sanc-
tions imposed on North Korea have done nothing to curb its
nuclear programme. Above all, sanctions have not worked be-
cause China, more concerned about the prospect of instability
next door than the North’s nuclear activities, has got around
them. Four-ﬁfths of all North Korea’s trade is with China.
Alarmed that the risk of conﬂict has risen, China may now be
changing its calculations. The latest UN resolution renders most
North Korean exports illegal, including the workers it sends
abroad. That looks likely to cut scarce hard-currency earnings
sharply. As for imports, shipments of crude oil have been capped,
while the quota for reﬁned oil products has been slashed. China
seems to be enforcing the sanctions much more tightly than be-
fore. Andrei Lankov of Kookmin University in Seoul describes
them as a full-scale economic blockade. To add to Mr Kim’s isola-
tion, several countries are expelling North Korean diplomats or
restricting the size of North Korean embassies, which act chieﬂy
as moneymaking enterprises for the regime.
The bleaker economic outlook may have something to do
with the most striking part of Mr Kim’s speech—an overture to-
wards South Korea, with which it has had no formal communica-
tion for nearly two years. Responding to an invitation to send
North Korean athletes to the Winter Olympics in the South next
month, Mr Kim called for “urgent” dialogue. Moon Jae-in, South
Korea’s president, welcomed the idea, no doubt guessing that the
North will not disrupt the games with missile antics if its athletes
are competing. More broadly, Mr Moon has long argued that dia-
logue would help ease tensions on the peninsula.
As for Mr Kim, he may hope for South Korean support for
sanctions to be rolled back. His regime used to earn crucial for-
eign currency from the Kaesong industrial zone on the border
with the South, where South Korean companies made use of
North Korean labour. But Mr Moon’s predecessor pulled out of
Kaesong in early 2016. Many South Koreans argue for its reopen-
ing. That would displease America. 

Wedge of tomorrow
Indeed, some Americans see Mr Kim’s overture as an attempt to
drive a wedge between South Korea and its protector. It probably
is, but it will not work. South Korea’s president may not get along
with Mr Trump, but he is no fool. He understands that the Kim re-
gime is the real problem, and that South Korea needs American
military support to deter it. His government backs UN sanctions,
in recent weeks seizing two Chinese-linked ships suspected of il-
legally supplying North Korea with oil.
The story in 2018 may be that sanctions bite harder: Mr Lan-
kov thinks a return of famine in parts of the countryside is possi-
ble. But do not imagine this will bring Mr Kim to heel. He will not
be too troubled if his people starve. And even if China enforces
the sanctions strictly enough to endanger Mr Kim’s regime, that is
unlikely to change his calculus on nuclear weapons. With his
back to the wall, nukes become more important to Mr Kim, not
less. Expect this year to be as nerve-racking as 2017, if not more. 7

“IT’S not a mere threat,” Kim Jong Un, North Korea’s dictator,
announced to the world in his new-year address, “but a reali-
ty that I have a nuclear button on the desk in my oﬃce. All of the
mainland United States is within the range of our nuclear strike.”
That is a terrifying thought to most Americans—and one made no
less terrifying by Donald Trump’s tweet in response: “I too have a
Nuclear Button, but it is a much bigger & more powerful one than
his, and my Button works!”
The Punch-and-Judy posturing would be comical if it did not
itself heighten the risk of conﬂict. In a febrile atmosphere, two
thin-skinned leaders might easily misconstrue the other’s inten-
tions, even if neither intended war. Or either might feel face is at
stake (Mr Trump, after all, vowed that the North would not be al-
lowed to develop nuclear weapons that could hit America). 
Mr Trump might also believe that a military strike would have
limited consequences. Some of his advisers appear to think so,
and this is a truly dangerous idea. America has little or no good
human intelligence inside North Korea, so a surgical pre-emptive
strike would probably fail in its objective, whether that was to
knock out the North’s nukes or the Kim regime itself. Such a strike
would risk starting a nuclear war that would kill millions, and a
conventional one that would devastate South Korea. If ever there
was a time for cool heads to prevail, it is now. 
The good news, for now, is that Mr Kim appears to view his nu-
clear capability as a deterrent, not a tool for aggression. “In no
way would the United States dare to ignite a war against me and
our country,” he rasped in a tobacco-inﬂected voice in his speech.
As for Mr Trump, the link between his words and deeds is always
tenuous, and he would not be the ﬁrst American president to
make threats he did not carry through. 
Yet the dangers are there. Mr Kim appears conﬁdent, if not
cocky. As well as a series of increasingly successful missile
launches last year, in September the North set oﬀ a presumed hy-
drogen bomb underground with a good 15 times the destructive
force of the one America dropped on Hiroshima. 
The conﬁdence Mr Kim expressed in his speech about his mil-
itary capabilities seemed at times to extend to the economy. The
“great historic achievement” of building nuclear weapons, he
said, has now “opened up bright prospects for the building of a

20

China

The Economist Januar y 6th 2018

Also in this section
21 Good news for nature?

Internet controls

Virtual panic

B E I J I N G

The great ﬁrewall is rising. How high will it go?
BEFORE he was jailed, few people had
surmount. But doubts are growing about
heard of Wu Xiangyang. But when
this interpretation. For the past year the
news of his conviction appeared in a state
government has been trying to make it
newspaper in late December, internet us-
harder to ﬁnd, and use, VPNs—the most
ers across China took note. A small trader
common form of ﬁrewall-leaping tool. Mr
from the southern province of Guangxi,
Wu’s punishment was clearly intended as
Mr Wu’s crime was to sell cheap and com-
a harsh warning to others in China not to
monly used software that enables people
try selling such services to ordinary con-
to circumvent China’s draconian internet
sumers. Speculation is growing that even
controls. His ﬁve-and-a-half-year prison
tougher curbs will be imposed in 2018.
sentence is the toughest-known penalty
Such fears may prove unwarranted, but
imposed for such “illegal business”.
the government has been doing little to al-
Motivated Chinese have long found it
lay them. Limiting the sale and use of VPNs
fairly easy to acquire such software, which
is one aim of a “clean-up” of the internet in-
provides access to what is known as a vir-
dustry that began last year and is supposed
tual private network (VPN). Through this
to be complete by the end of March. Sever-
kind of connection, a user in China can
al popular providers based in China have
reach the thousands of websites that are
folded under government pressure. Those
blacklisted by the government—including
that remain are aimed at business users.
almost all Google services, many news
Mr Wu’s sentencing followed that of an-
sites and most foreign social networks.
other man accused of a similar oﬀence
Many people use VPNs several times each
who was jailed in March for nine months. 
day to jump the country’s “great ﬁrewall”,
as its system of online censorship is often
called in English (Chinese netizens have
adopted the acronym GFW). Foreigners in
China depend on VPNs to reach sites they
routinely need: everything from Gmail
and Dropbox to Facebook and Instagram.
Many observers believe that the great
ﬁrewall’s porousness is a feature, not a
bug—that its architects see beneﬁt in a bar-
rier that does not completely alienate en-
trepreneurs, academics and foreign resi-
dents, but which most Chinese web-users
will not have the energy, or the ﬁnances
(VPNs usually require subscriptions), to

Piling on the bricks
As well as closing down suppliers based in
China, the government has made it more
diﬃcult for people in China to buy foreign
VPN services. In July Apple dismayed civil-
rights campaigners when it agreed to wipe
VPN products from its Chinese app store.
The company pulled down more than 600
of them. They are also disappearing from
Android stores, though more slowly.
Meanwhile most of the public places that
used to oﬀer unﬁltered internet—such as
hotels with many foreign guests—now pro-
vide the expurgated kind. 

For daily analysis and debate on China, visit
Economist.com/china

Subscribers to the best-known foreign
VPN services are still able to use their ac-
counts in China. But they were rattled in
July when Bloomberg, citing anonymous
sources, reported that telecoms companies
had been told to block access to unautho-
rised “personal” VPNs, presumably includ-
ing foreign ones, by February 1st 2018. Chi-
na’s internet providers may well have the
ability to do so: during sensitive political
events foreign VPNs often become cum-
bersome or even impossible to use, appar-
ently because of government-ordered ef-
forts to throttle them. The ministry in
charge of cyber aﬀairs issued a confusing
rebuttal of Bloomberg’s story. Foreign dip-
lomats in Beijing say they are ﬁnding it dif-
ﬁcult to get straight answers from the gov-
ernment about how far it intends to go.
This is worrying not just for people who
want to surf the web without annoying
obstructions. Many ﬁrms use their own in-
house VPN systems or similar technologies
to enable staﬀ to gain secure access to cor-
porate networks remotely. Oﬃcials say
that tighter controls over VPNs will not im-
pede such usage. But businesses worry
that they may be forced instead to use gov-
ernment-authorised methods, including
oﬃcially approved VPNs and leased lines,
that are less reliable and easier to spy on
than their own systems. 
Those fears will only grow if a new law
on encryption, presently being drafted,
limits the extent to which companies are
permitted to scramble sensitive communi-
cations—as some observers fear it might.
Businesses have good reason to feel ner-
vous. A cyber-security law that took eﬀect
in June allows authorities to review data,
such as customer records, that ﬁrms wish
to send to headquarters abroad. 
As China’s
increasingly autocratic
leader, Xi Jinping, tightens his grip on pow-
er, it is becoming harder to remain optimis-
tic that he will continue to tolerate circum-
vention of the ﬁrewall. He shows little 

1

The Economist Januar y 6th 2018 

2 sympathy with the complaints of foreign
businesses about the diﬃculties they face
in China. And he is clearly determined that
the internet in China be made dissent-free,
even if his sweeping eﬀorts to achieve this
irk members of the middle class on which
the Communist Party depends for support.
Last year regulators shut down many ce-
lebrity-gossip blogs and some sites that
stream live events such as concerts, appar-
ently because they could be used as plat-
forms for embarrassing the party. 
In part as a result of tightening censor-
ship, China’s online chatter has been grad-
ually migrating from public microblogs to
instant-messaging apps such as WeChat,
where users can create private groups up to
500 strong. But even in these forums,
throwaway criticisms and jokes about the
party get people in trouble. The govern-
ment is trying to make ordinary web users
act as censors themselves. In September it
said it would start holding the creators of
all private chat groups jointly responsible
if they fail to police discussions to the au-
thorities’ satisfaction.
The party is still haunted by the social-
media-fuelled protests of the Arab spring
early this decade (recent anti-government
protests in Iran have been an unsettling re-
minder of that period: censors have or-
dered media not to report on them). But of-
ﬁcials may have failed to appreciate the
cost to China’s image abroad, and to the
party’s at home, should it deny access to
services that make online life liveable be-
hind the great ﬁrewall. Most Chinese citi-
zens who regularly visit forbidden web-
sites are people who have beneﬁted from
China’s growing prosperity and who have
little if any desire to challenge the party’s
rule. Angering them may prove risky. 7

The environment

Tusks, skins and
waste recycling

B E I J I N G

The natural world may have less to fear
than expected from China’s rise 
UNTIL the end of 2017, carved elephant
tusks were still sold legally in China.
International trade in ivory had been
banned by the government since 1990, but
not domestic transactions. At a shop in a
glitzy mall in Beijing, the manager showed
oﬀ his prize exhibit: a carving the size of a
football of 30 ivory spheres, one inside the
other, each moving separately and intri-
cately carved. It was an example of an an-
cient craftsmanship, and one that has no
future. On January 1st China banned ivory
sales. The last ivory-carving factories and
shops (including the one in Beijing) closed.
Environmentalists have long fretted

Though they’re disapprovin’

about the impact that a rising China will
have on the natural world. They worry not
only about carbon emissions but also that,
one day, the last tiger will be killed so its pe-
nis can be turned into an ineﬀective aphro-
disiac or the last elephant slaughtered so its
tusks can be carved into a gift. Yet as China
has grown richer, it has changed. Three
pieces of news at the start of 2018 suggest
that some of the worst environmental
fears are not being realised. 
The closure of the domestic ivory busi-
ness (the ﬁrst of the changes) goes back to a
deal between Barack Obama, then Ameri-
ca’s president, and Xi Jinping, his Chinese
counterpart, in 2015. They promised a
“nearly complete ban” on ivory sales.
America duly banned transactions in 2016,
except for those of century-old antique
pieces. China closed a third of its ivory-
carving workshops in early 2017 and the
rest in the past few days. Illegal sales will
doubtless continue. In 2017 oﬃcials in
Hong Kong seized over seven tonnes of il-
legal ivory, the largest haul for 30 years.
Hong Kong’s ivory market, which is regu-
lated separately, remains open, but it is due
to be phased out by 2022. 
China’s actions seem to be having the
desired eﬀect. A study for Save the Ele-
phants, a charity in Kenya, found that the
average price of a kilogram of good-quality
elephant tusk in China had fallen from
$2,100 in 2014 to $730 in 2017 (see chart).
The ban that has just taken eﬀect is likely to
drive prices down further. Elephants are
still being slaughtered in vast numbers. It is
even possible that the fall in the price of
ivory may cause poachers to slaughter
more beasts, since they need more tusks to
make the same amount of money. But
eventually, making ivory worth 
less
should reduce the incentive to poach.

China 21

This is not the only case in which the
government has sought to moderate the
environmental consequences of Chinese
tastes. A campaign led by a former basket-
ball star, Yao Ming, helped slash demand
for shark’s ﬁn soup, a delicacy. Imports of
dried ﬁns fell from 4,800 tonnes in 2004 to
20 tonnes in 2014. The government also
banned shark’s ﬁn soup from oﬃcial ban-
quets and the sale of any edible product
from endangered species, such as pango-
lin, whose scales are used in traditional
Chinese medicine. 
China is far from an animal-welfare
paradise. By coincidence, on the day ivory
sales were banned, the country cut the
duty on imported donkey skin from 5% to
2%, the second of this year’s changes. Gela-
tine from boiled donkey hide is another in-
gredient in traditional medicine (skins,
probably destined for the Chinese market,
are pictured in Kenya). Campaigners say
the action threatens the world’s donkey
population, though it is hard to see how,
given that there were 44m donkeys in 2016
and their numbers are rising. All things be-
ing equal, more demand from China ought
to translate into more donkeys raised. But it
is certainly pushing up the price of donkey-
hide gelatine (see chart).
Indeed sometimes it is China’s mod-
ernisation that has the biggest environ-
mental impact—as the third of the recent
changes shows. China is not only the
world’s biggest emitter of carbon, but the
world’s largest recycler, treating just over
half of exported plastic waste. Recycling,
for all its beneﬁts, is a ﬁlthy business. In
one town that specialises in recycling used
electronics, 80% of children were found to
have excess lead in their blood. On January
1st China banned the import of 24 catego-
ries of waste, including household plastics.
This should improve its own environment
but is a problem in countries such as Brit-
ain which send China rubbish for process-
ing. The head of the UK Recycling Associa-
tion called it “a huge blow for us”. 
If it is a shock, it is a pleasant one. As
China gets richer it is taking the environ-
ment more seriously (see page 51). On bal-
ance, that beneﬁts everyone. 7

Wallets are affected, too

China
Wholesale pr ice of raw ivory

$’000 per kg 

Donkey-hide gelatine

yuan ’000 per kg

3.0

2.5

2.0

1.5

1.0

0.5

0

2010 11

12

13

14

15

16

17

Sources: CITES; Save the Elephants; Wind Info

3.0

2.5

2.0

1.5

1.0

0.5

0

22

United States

The Economist Januar y 6th 2018

Also in this section
23 Life expectancy falls again
24 What Congress didn’t get round to
24 High-tax states scramble
25 The Supreme Court and voting r ights
26 California’s cannabis laws
Lexington is on holiday

Congress

The polarising express

W A S H I N G T O N , D C

Blue-state Republicans could become almost as rare as white southern Democrats
“I OPERATE under the principle of justi-
servative, socially liberal wing, took their
ﬁed optimism,” says Deep Sran, as he
name from New York’s Republican gover-
shows oﬀ the school he founded—based,
nor. But as the party grew more uniformly
he says, on his reading of Plato’s “Repub-
conservative, its centre has moved steadily
lic”. If voters elected representatives based
westward and southward. Just as Barack
on their CVs, Mr Sran would cakewalk into
Obama’s unpopularity in the South has-
Congress. A lawyer with a doctorate in hu-
tened, but did not cause, the near extinc-
man development-turned teacher and en-
tion of white southern Democrats, so Pres-
trepreneur, Mr Sran is the son of immi-
ident Donald Trump’s unpopularity looks
grants, 
raised 
in 
the 
suburbs
of
likely to sharply reduce the number of Re-
Washington, DC. He is one of 11 Democrats
publicans from liberal states.
champing at the bit to replace Barbara
Before attempting to predict the out-
Comstock, a Republican who has repre-
come of this year’s mid-terms, a couple of
sented Virginia’s diverse, wealthy 10th con-
caveats apply. First, the elections are still
gressional district for two terms. She is one
ten months away. Much can change in that
of 23 Republicans representing districts
time. Second, the mid-terms are not a sin-
that Hillary Clinton won in 2016. Demo-
gle contest, but hundreds, each with its
crats think they can ﬂip them all, and more:
own unique set of candidates and circum-
the Democratic Congressional Campaign
stances. Challengers who look good on pa-
Committee (DCCC) has 91 districts in its
per will have feet of clay; incumbents
sights, the lion’s share of them in states that
deemed all but dead will ﬁnd reserves of
Mrs Clinton won or barely lost.
strength and cunning.
They are, of course, unlikely to win
That said, Democrats are not wrong to
them all. But an upset election, as this
feel conﬁdent. More than two dozen Re-
year’s midterms in November could easily
publican congressmen, many from com-
be, will break ﬁrst and hardest in those
petitive districts, have announced their re-
states—which would leave the Republican
tirements. Democrats hold a nearly
congressional caucus smaller and more
13-point lead on a generic ballot. They won
strident, and risks making Congress even
only two of seven special federal elections
more dysfunctional.
last year, but they outperformed expecta-
Republicans from liberal states were
tions in most of them. Victories in Ala-
not always on the endangered list. Rocke-
bama and Virginia’s gubernatorial elec-
feller Republicans, the party’s ﬁscally con-
tion showed that Democrats are energised,

For daily analysis and debate on Amer ica, visit
Economist.com/unitedstates
Economist.com/blogs/democracyinamer ica

while Republicans are not. They also
showed Democrats performing strongly in
the suburbs, home to many moderate Re-
publicans, particularly in liberal states.
Going back to 1934, a new president’s
party has lost an average of 23 House seats
in the mid-terms after his election (Demo-
crats need 24 to win back the House). The
Republican gerrymanders of 2010 may
make it harder for Democrats to translate
votes eﬃciently into seats, but strong
Democratic turnout could dampen the ger-
rymanders’ eﬀect.
And Mr Trump is uniquely unpopular.
Around 56% of voters disapprove of his
performance—more by far than any presi-
dent dating back to Harry Truman at this
point in their tenure. Republicans hope
that a booming economy, low unemploy-
ment and the extra money voters will see
from tax reform will provide favourable
headwinds. But the president’s unpopular-
ity makes that less likely. “When you dis-
like someone, you’re unlikely to think
they’re responsible for anything good that
happens, while you blame them for every-
thing bad,” says Larry Sabato, a political
scientist at the University of Virginia.
Blue-state Republicans have the added
albatross of the tax bill signed into law late
last year. Previously, taxpayers could de-
duct many state and local taxes (SALT)
from their federal income taxes. The new
bill caps that deduction at $10,000—much
less than many residents of high-tax, high-
cost-of-living states such as California,
New York and New Jersey pay. Their voters
may conclude that Republicans weap-
onised the tax code to punish states that
did not vote for Mr Trump. Some blue-state
Republicans voted against the bill; how
much that will matter to voters eager for re-
venge will be tested in November.

1

2

The Economist Januar y 6th 2018 

Republicans counter Democratic opti-
mism by pointing out that their members
who have hung on in liberal districts have
done so for a reason: competitive districts
tend to produce battle-tested candidates
used to tough contests. And the time for
Democratic surprises is over: “If a Republi-
can incumbent is caught oﬀ-guard” after
last year’s elections, says Nathan Gon-
zales, a campaign analyst, “it’s their own
foolishness.” Even comfortable Republi-
can incumbents—such as Rodney Freling-
huysen, who has represented New Jersey’s
rich 11th district since 1995 and has never
won less than 58% of the vote—have raised
their campaign game. 
Democratic enthusiasm has a down-
side: big, messy primaries that either pull
candidates too far to the left for swing dis-
tricts or reproduce the 2016 Republican pri-
maries, in which a bunch of indistinguish-
able moderates split most of the vote, thus
empowering an extreme candidate with a
small but devoted fan base. And even a
Democratic thumping will not eliminate
every liberal-state Republican. Chris Smith
in New Jersey, Chris Collins in New York,
Devin Nunes and Kevin McCarthy in Cali-
fornia and Cathy McMorris Rodgers in
Washington, for instance, all come from
districts that Mr Trump won handily. But
last year’s elections showed that Demo-
crats excel at boosting turnout in Demo-
cratic-leaning areas, which will improve
their chances in swing districts.
That is why, even with all the caveats in
place, a thinning out of Republican ranks
in Democratic states looks likely. That
would leave Republicans from safe seats—
notably the hard-right members of the
Freedom Caucus—proportionately more
powerful. The 12 highest-scoring Republi-
cans on the Lugar Bipartisan Index—which
measures how well legislators work with
members of the opposite party—all come
from Democratic-leaning or swing states;
the top three are all New Yorkers.
If a signiﬁcant number of them were to
lose their seats as part of a wave big
enough to give Democrats a majority in
the House, that would not much matter:
Democrats will presumably be as unlikely
to reach across the aisle for Republican
votes as Republicans have been to seek
Democratic ones. 
But if Democrats fall just short of a ma-
jority, Paul Ryan’s days as Speaker could be
numbered: a more hard-right caucus
would want harder-right
leadership.
Democrats will ﬁnd it diﬃcult to retake the
Senate: they would have to successfully
defend all 26 of their seats, including ten in
states that Mr Trump won, and also steal
two from Republicans. In that scenario,
ﬁnding something that could pass both the
House, with a more powerful Freedom
Caucus and less of a counterweight, and
the more moderate Senate would become
even harder than it is already. 7

Life expectancy

Not great, again

Why life expectancy is down for the
second year in a row
JUST as Americans headed home for the
year-end holidays, the Centres for Dis-
ease Control and Prevention (CDC) is-
sued its annual report on mortality—which
had no news to celebrate. According to the
report, published on December 21st, life ex-
pectancy in America fell in 2016, for the sec-
ond year in a row. An American baby born
in 2016 can expect to live on average 78.6
years, down from 78.9 in 2014. The last time
life expectancy was lower than in the pre-
ceding year was in 1993. The last time it fell
for two consecutive years was in 1962-63. 
Other statistics suggest that this alarm-
ing trend is caused by the epidemic of ad-
diction to opioids, which is becoming
deadlier. Drug overdoses claimed more
than 63,000 lives in 2016. Two-thirds of
these deaths were caused by opioids, in-
cluding potent synthetic drugs such as fen-
tanyl and tramadol, which are easier to
overdo by accident and are becoming
more popular among illegal drug users.
According to the CDC, the leading
causes of death in 2016 remained heart dis-
ease and cancer. But a category called “un-
intentional injuries”, which includes drug
overdoses, climbed to third place—from
fourth place in 2015 and ﬁfth place in 2012.
Although unintentional injuries caused
just 6% of deaths in 2016, they claim mostly
people in the prime of their lives. A young
person’s death cuts average life expectancy
by more than the death of an older person. 
The steepest rise in mortality was
among 25- to 34-year-olds. In that age group
deaths per 100,000 people from any cause
increased by 11% from 2015 to 2016. Mortal-
ity from drug overdoses in the same age
group shot up by 50% from 2014 to 2016. 
At the same time, the decrease in mor-
tality from heart disease and cancer—

Wrong turn

Average life expectancy at bir th, years

Japan

United States

Br itain

84

82

80

78

76

74

72

France

Germany

1980 85

90

95 2000 05

10

16

Sources: OECD; CDC

United States 23

Long day’s journey

which has been a chief driver of the steady
increase in life expectancy—has begun to
level oﬀ. As a result, further increases in
overdose deaths would probably push life
expectancy down again. A decline for
three straight years was last seen in Ameri-
ca a century ago, when the Spanish ﬂu pan-
demic ravaged the world.
This outcome seems likely. According to
CDC oﬃcials, provisional data for the ﬁrst
half of 2017 suggest that overdose deaths
continued to rise. Foot-dragging by Presi-
dent Donald Trump’s administration has
not helped matters. On the campaign trail
in 2016, Mr Trump promised to take on the
opioid epidemic as a priority. So far, his ad-
ministration has not produced a plan or
appointed a “drug tsar” to oversee a strat-
egy to curb addiction. Nor has it asked
Congress to allocate the billions of dollars
needed to treat the estimated 2m people
hooked on opioids. The national Public
Health Emergency Fund has just $57,000
on hand, because it has not been replen-
ished for years. States and local authorities
are setting up addiction-treatment ser-
vices. But without new money from feder-
al sources, their eﬀorts will buckle under
the weight of the problem.
A continued decline in life expectancy
would leave America trailing even farther
behind other rich countries. Lives in Amer-
ica are already two years shorter than the
average in the OECD group of 35 rich and
soon-to-be-rich countries: life expectancy
is closer to Costa Rica’s and Turkey’s than
to that of Britain, France and Germany. If
the administration cannot reverse this
then—at least when it comes to longevity in
the Western world—its policy might be de-
scribed as America Last. 7

24 United States

Congress

Hell’s laundry list 

W A S H I N G T O N , D C 

After ignoring everything but tax,
Congress has much to do and little time
BLAME it on the sand traps: President
Donald Trump returned to work after
seven straight days of golf enraged. Even
by his own standards, his Twitter fury on
January 2nd was extraordinary. The presi-
dent boasted that he has a “much bigger”
nuclear button than North Korea’s despot-
ic ruler, Kim Jong Un; announced a myste-

rious “MOST DISHONEST & CORRUPT ME-

DIA AWARDS” event and called, on a
whim, for a political rival to be jailed.
The next day excerpts from a forthcom-
ing book on the Trump campaign began to
circulate. In one juicy nugget, Steve Ban-
non, the chief of that victorious campaign,
described a meeting that Donald Trump ju-
nior and Jared Kushner held in Trump Tow-
er with a Russian national oﬀering help as
“treasonous”. Don junior would “crack like
an egg” under the pressure of the investiga-
tion into election meddling, Mr Bannon
supposedly said. Cue fury from the presi-
dent, who said Mr Bannon had “lost his
mind” and “doesn’t represent my base—
he’s only in it for himself.” A lawyer for Mr
Trump threatened legal action. Hello 2018.
Meanwhile, the list of things left un-
done by the federal government is long
and unpleasant for Republican leaders in
Congress (one privately calls it a “shit sand-
wich”). It
includes funding a popular
health-insurance programme for children,
ensuring that
the upcoming census is
sound, renewing a key surveillance tool
and perhaps most important, striking a
spending deal to keep the government
open past January 19th. Because Republi-

Sandwich o’clock

cans are no longer using special proce-
dures to avoid ﬁlibusters, the ﬁxes will
need to be bipartisan. 
To date, the worst casualty of congres-
sional dysfunction has been the Children’s
Health Insurance Programme, which pro-
vides coverage for poor families that make
too much to qualify for Medicaid. Con-
gress let funding for the scheme, which in-
sures 9m children, expire in September.
States, which administer the programme,
were forced to resort to emergency mea-
sures. Some have already frozen enrol-
ment. An estimated 1.9m children would
have lost coverage in January had Con-
gress not, just before going on holiday,
passed a short-term ﬁx funding the pro-
gramme until March.
Operating procedure for Congress has
been to practise brinkmanship and issue
apocalyptic warnings right up to dead-
lines, fail to come to any agreement, and
then pass short-term ﬁxes that keep exist-
ing policy, no matter how ill-conceived, on
autopilot. But some matters, like the cen-
sus, which must be taken every ten years
by constitutional mandate, cannot be so
easily put oﬀ. The Census Bureau typically
increases spending in the critical years be-
fore the 2020 count, which will determine
new election boundaries and the annual
distribution of $600bn in government
funds. But Congress has not given the
agency proper funding, forcing it to cancel
two of its three dress rehearsals. The bu-
reau also lacks permanent
leadership,
which the Trump administration appears
to be in little hurry to ﬁll. 
Civil-rights groups are worried that this
will dilute the political representation of
minorities, who are less likely to respond
to census-takers. A recent request by the
Department of Justice to add a citizenship
question to the census, would, if approved,
probably depress response rates among
immigrants. “If you have fear and non-re-
sponse among large swathes of the public,

The Economist Januar y 6th 2018

you will get an inaccurate census, and
that’s a failed census,” says Vanita Gupta,
president of the Leadership Conference on
Civil and Human Rights. 
Congress must also renew a provision
of the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act
known as Section 702, which lets spies in-
tercept communications. Under current
law intelligence agencies cannot directly
target Americans. Privacy advocates wor-
ry that the agencies still sweep in too many
phone calls and e-mails involving citizens.
This issue scrambles the usual partisan al-
legiances of Congress: civil libertarians
from both parties want more checks and
protections; national-security
hawks
would like a clean reauthorisation. 
Jumbled coalitions—and 
the sheer
number of unresolved matters—make
grand bargains unlikely. Congressmen
may attempt horse-trading: children’s
health insurance in exchange for unfet-
tered surveillance; Obamacare funds for
military spending. Such eﬀorts could well
fail, leaving Congress to pass another
short-term reprieve and repeat the same
struggle in a month’s time. 7

High-tax states

Tax replanning

W A S H I N G T O N , D C

How states may try to circumvent the
new tax law
DEMOCRATS usually lament eﬀorts by
the rich to avoid paying taxes. Yet the
bill President Donald Trump signed into
law on December 22nd may spur Demo-
cratic-leaning states
to concoct
such
schemes. The reform capped at $10,000
the deduction, from federally taxable in-
come, of state and local taxes (the “SALT”
deduction). As a result, those who pay
large local levies are likely to pay more fed-
eral tax in 2018. The change is particularly
bad for high-earners living in big houses in
states like New York and California, which
impose high taxes. These states—which
tend to see the reform as Republicans shak-
ing down their political opponents—may
yet put up some resistance.
Just under one-in-three taxpayers made
use of the SALT deduction in 2015. On aver-
age, they knocked about $12,500 oﬀ their
federally taxable income, according to the
Government Finance Oﬃcers Associa-
tion—only a little above the new cap. Yet
the deduction has been much more valu-
able than that to some. Those earning over
$1m who took the SALT deduction used it
to reduce their federally taxable income by
about $275,000.
Individuals and states alike are think-
ing about how to circumvent the new cap. 

1

2

The Economist Januar y 6th 2018 

In late December, huge queues formed at
tax oﬃces in places such as Fairfax County,
Virginia—the third-richest county in Amer-
ica—as residents sought to prepay their
property taxes for 2018. They hoped to de-
duct the early payments on their federal
tax returns for 2017, before the cap came
into force. But the IRS mostly scuppered
these hopes when, on December 27th, it
said that only taxes that had been “as-
sessed” before the end of 2017 would be
deductible. Those prepaying estimates of
their 2018 taxes will be out of luck.
In any case, this avoidance strategy
would only have worked for one year.
Some, like Andrew Cuomo, the governor
of New York, hope to ﬁnd a longer term
dodge. One idea is to let taxpayers make
charitable contributions to state coﬀers, in
exchange for a one-for-one reduction in
their state tax bills. Because charitable con-
tributions remain deductible without lim-
it, this would circumvent the cap. 
It would also invite legal challenges.
Taxpayers are not meant to receive beneﬁts
in exchange for their deductible contribu-
tions. Remarkably, there is some legal un-
certainty over whether credits towards
state taxes count. Charity typically already
confers tax beneﬁts at a state level, but fed-
eral authorities do not see this as invalidat-
ing the federal deduction. Some hope, opti-
mistically, that the courts would take this
logic to its extreme, and allow even a com-
plete tax credit for contributions made to
the state itself. 
Another idea is that states could raise a
higher proportion of their revenues from
payroll taxes on employers. Such levies,
which are invisible to workers, remain
fully deductible for ﬁrms. The main draw-
back of this plan is that ﬁrms would proba-
bly want to respond by cutting wages. In
theory, workers should not mind, if their
state income taxes fall commensurately. In
practice, they would probably object.
Some fear that if neither of these strat-
egies works, high-earners may take a more
rudimentary route to tax avoidance: relo-
cation. This worry is probably overblown.
A study in 2016 of the geographic mobility
of workers earning more than $1m from
1999 to 2011 found very little migration in
response to tax rates. This probably helps
explain why state tax rates vary so much in
the ﬁrst place. Historically, states have not
structured their tax systems to maximise
the SALT deduction, notes Jared Walczak of
the Tax Foundation, a right-leaning think-
tank. For example, taxpayers must choose
between deducting their income taxes and
deducting their sales taxes. Yet rather than
specialising in one or the other, most states
levy both. 
Unless Democrats come to power and
restore the SALT deduction, rich people in
Democratic states will probably have to
learn to live with higher taxes. But expect
some grumbling in the meantime. 7

The Supreme Court and voting r ights

Use it or lose it

N EW Y O R K

An Ohio voter-purge case with national
implications comes before the justices
POLITICAL
apathy worried 
Jean-
Jacques Rousseau. In a healthy republic,
he wrote in “The Social Contract” in 1762,
citizens “ﬂy to the assemblies” and take an
active role in public aﬀairs. He would
frown on America’s voter turnout, which
hovers at 40% for mid-term elections and
seldom goes much higher than 55% for a
presidential race. But he might have been
even more alarmed by laws that sideline
infrequent voters from politics.
On January 10th a rule that has disen-
franchised hundreds of thousands of
Ohioans
comes under
the Supreme
Court’s microscope. Husted v Philip Ran-
dolph Institute concerns what the League of
Women Voters and the Brennan Centre for
Justice calls the most restrictive approach
to winnowing voter rolls found anywhere
in America. Since 1994, in addition to nix-
ing people who have died or moved—
which all states do—Ohio has sent a post-
card to voters who have not voted for two
years. If they fail to return the address con-
ﬁrmation and then miss two more federal
elections, they are taken oﬀ the rolls.
Ohio says its “supplemental process”
for trimming voter lists is authorised by
two laws: the National Voting Rights Act
(NVRA) of 1993, which demands “accurate
and current voter registration rolls”, and
the Help America Vote Act (HAVA) of 2002.
Challengers reply that Ohio’s procedure
clashes with the primary mission of the
NVRA: protecting the “fundamental” right
of American citizens to vote. When the
Sixth Circuit Court of Appeals considered

United States 25

Husted in 2016, it sided with the plaintiﬀs
by a 2-1 vote. Inactivity, the majority found,
is an illicit basis for wiping registered vot-
ers from the rolls. According to the NVRA,
no individual may be removed from state
lists “by reason of the person’s failure to
vote”. In their brief to the justices, lawyers
for the American Civil Liberties Union ex-
plained why Congress insisted on this ca-
veat: “While voting is a right, people have
an equal right not to vote,” a Senate report
declared, “for whatever reason.” 
The core of Husted involves a tricky de-
tail of statutory interpretation: how to read
a line in HAVA barring states from remov-
ing individuals from voter lists “solely by
reason of a failure to vote”. The challengers
and the Sixth Circuit majority contend that
Ohio de-registers voters based only on in-
activity—and thus falls foul of the law.
Ohio’s Republican secretary of state, Jon
Husted, and the dissenting Sixth Circuit
judge, counter that the erasure results from
that fact and another omission: the indi-
vidual’s failure to conﬁrm his address by
sending the postcard.
For decades, the Department of Justice
(DOJ) understood the law the way the chal-
lengers do. But in a rare about-face the DOJ
under Donald Trump now embraces
Ohio’s position. Samuel Bagenstos, a law
professor at the University of Michigan
who served in Barack Obama’s DOJ, la-
ments, in an amicus brief drafted for 13 for-
mer DoJ lawyers who served in Demo-
cratic and Republican administrations,
that the department’s “longstanding view”
has been “abandoned”. 
Mr Bagenstos’s brief examines the legal
bases for voter purges. If Ohio wants to re-
move people who have moved, the brief
notes, it is a better idea to consult post-of-
ﬁce or motor-vehicle records than to guess
from voting history. People may opt to stay
at home on election day because they dis-
like the candidates, feel their vote won’t
make a diﬀerence or are dissuaded by vot-
er-ID laws: inactivity is not a reliable “indi-
cation that someone has moved”.
A study by Reuters found that about
twice as many Democrats as Republicans
were purged from the rolls in Ohio before
the election of 2016. This partisan context
may presage an ideologically split Su-
preme Court ruling, but Rick Hasen, an ex-
pert in election law, thinks Mr Bagenstos’s
brief has a chance of swaying the court’s
newest conservative, Neil Gorsuch. “I
think if Justice Gorsuch is true to his tex-
tualist proclamations, his vote could well
be in play,” Mr Hasen says. Elizabeth Wy-
dra of the Constitutional Accountability
Centre agrees. Justice Gorsuch insists that
courts “must not rewrite federal laws un-
der the guise of interpreting them”, she
says, which bodes well for the plaintiﬀs.
“States may not disenfranchise voters sim-
ply because they have failed to exercise
their right to vote in the past.” 7

The Economist Januar y 6th 2018

abuse. A ﬁfth will go towards cleaning up
environmental damage caused by illegal
cannabis-growing. For comparison, the
largest share of tax revenues in Oregon, an-
other deeply progressive state, goes to a
general education fund. 
Some cities in the Golden State are tak-
ing things even further. In Los Angeles, resi-
dents with past marijuana convictions
will not only be allowed to buy licences to
sell the drug, but will be given priority. Un-
der the city’s “social-equity programme”,
low-income Angelenos who have previ-
ous marijuana convictions or who have
lived in areas with disproportionately high
rates of arrest for marijuana oﬀences will
be given preference when licences to open
marijuana retail businesses are granted.
Oakland, San Francisco and Sacramento
have introduced similar initiatives.
California has been widely criticised
for its sloppy management of the medical
marijuana industry. That raises questions
about whether it can do better with the rec-
reational stuﬀ. John Hudak of the Centre
for Eﬀective Public Management at Brook-
ings, a think-tank, is cautiously conﬁdent.
“California was the ﬁrst state to legalise
medical marijuana—it didn’t have the ben-
eﬁt of experience of what works and what
doesn’t,” he says. “Now it does.”
Legalisation seems unlikely to create a
new group of heavy potheads, as seems to
have happened in other states where pot
has been legalised (nationwide, about 80%
of the stuﬀ is consumed by just 20% of us-
ers). Obtaining a medical licence to use
marijuana in California has long been as
easy as applying online and paying
around $40. Getting the stuﬀ illegally has
not been hard, either. When a preppy man
in loafers waiting to enter MedMen was
asked if he had previously used a medical
licence to buy marijuana, he said no.
When asked if he used the drug regularly
he nodded. Most Californians who want
to consume heavily already do so. But now
the state can tax them for it. 7

26 United States

Cannabis laws

California inhales

L O S A N G E L E S

to have their records expunged. Between
November 2016, when Proposition 64 was
passed, and September 2017, 4,885 Califor-
nians petitioned to reduce or void their
convictions. Donnie Anderson, chairman
of the California Minority Alliance, which
champions people who have been
harmed by drug criminalisation, applauds
this initiative. “In the past, if you were
white and caught with marijuana you
would be let oﬀ. If you were black or Lat-
ino, you were not,” he says. A study by the
American Civil Liberties Union, an advo-
cacy group, found that between 2001 and
2010 African-Americans were more than
three times as likely to be arrested for mari-
juana possession as white Americans, de-
spite similar consumption rates. 
California’s law also allows those con-
victed of past marijuana crimes to enter
the cannabis industry. Jolene Forman of
the Drug Policy Alliance, a pressure group,
says this is ideal for two reasons. First, it al-
lows people who have been operating
black-market cannabis businesses to be-
come legal. Second, it gives people harmed
by the war on drugs the chance to proﬁt in
the legal cannabis industry. 
With the revenue raised from recre-
ational marijuana sales, California hopes
to reduce some of the harms of criminali-
sation. After deductions for cannabis re-
search and community programmes in the
areas most aﬀected by past marijuana poli-
cies, among other things, three-ﬁfths of tax
revenues from the purchase of recreational
marijuana will go towards anti-addiction
programmes and education about drug

The state’s new cannabis regulations are almost comically progressive
ON A hazy January morning, scores of
cannabis enthusiasts queued outside
MedMen’s elegant West Hollywood store
to celebrate the ﬁrst day they could legally
purchase the drug without a medical li-
cence. As they took their place behind a
man covered in piercings and dragon tat-
toos, two women in Spandex leggings and
designer sunglasses chatted about what
they would buy. When, an hour later, they
were invited in, they picked up a shopping
basket and sought out a “budtender” to
help them choose between marijuana
ﬂowers, THC-infused citrus soda, and can-
nabis chocolate. “My dad has really bad
back pain,” one explained, as the pair
stood in front of shelves displaying canna-
bis bath bombs, marijuana lotions and
hemp-oil dog treats. “But he’s an old con-
servative white male. What can I buy him
that won’t freak him out?”
California pioneered the legalisation of
marijuana for medical use in 1996. But until
this year the state’s cannabis industry has
been largely unregulated. In November
2016, following residents of other states
such as Colorado, Washington and Ore-
gon, Californian voters resoundingly ap-
proved Proposition 64, a measure to allow
the sale of recreational marijuana. After a
year of planning, on January 1st it became
legal for licensed dispensaries to sell mari-
juana for recreational use. 
Besides California, seven other states
and the District of Columbia have legal-
ised recreational marijuana. But California
is diﬀerent in two ways. First is its size. With
legalisation, California—the world’s sixth-
largest economy—instantly became its larg-
est legal market for recreational marijuana.
A study by the University of California Ag-
ricultural Issues Centre at the University of
California, Davis predicts that sales from
recreational cannabis will eventually
reach $5bn a year. The state already sells
marijuana worth more than $2bn a year
for medical purposes. For comparison,
Colorado sold $1.3bn in total, for recre-
ational and medical use, in 2016. Since the
federal prohibition means business can-
not be conducted across state lines, Califor-
nian companies will be able to reach a
scale that businesses in other states lack.
Second, perhaps unsurprisingly for a
state seen as a Petri dish for socially liberal
policy, California’s new regulations are no-
tably progressive. For a start, they allow
residents convicted of drug oﬀences that
would not be crimes under the new order

Wake up and smell the THC

The Amer icas

The Economist Januar y 6th 2018 27

Also in this section
28 Corporatising Colombia’s emeralds
29 Rewr iting Canada’s map

Peru

The presidential hostage

L I M A

The way Peru’s president pardoned Alberto Fujimori has weakened him
IT WAS a strange video announcing a rash
when he was economy minister. Another
decision. In a taped message President
ﬁrm, First Capital, owned by Gerardo Se-
Pedro Pablo Kuczynski, in a dimly lit room
púlveda, a manager at Westﬁeld, received
and with the harrowed look of a kidnap
$4m from Odebrecht between 2010 and
victim, told Peruvians that the pardon he
2013. The contracts were legal and above-
had issued to Alberto Fujimori, a jailed for-
board, Odebrecht stated. In successive,
mer president, was “perhaps the most diﬃ-
stumbling explanations Mr Kuczynski in-
cult decision of my life”. He had taken it be-
sisted that Mr Sepúlveda was in sole
cause Mr Fujimori should not be allowed
charge of Westﬁeld when he was in gov-
to “die in prison—justice is not revenge”. He
ernment, though he admitted he received
called on Peruvians to move on from “neg-
“some money” in “dividends” from the
ative emotions inherited from the past”.
Odebrecht contract. His only link to First
His unspoken hope was that, having bare-
Capital was a fee it paid him for a consult-
ly survived an attempt by congress to im-
ancy job when he was not in government. 
peach him, the pardon would steady his
This was enough for Mr Kuczynski’s
shaky presidency. But to many, it looks as if
foes to pounce. Chief among them is Keiko
his presidency has been taken hostage.
Fujimori, Alberto’s daughter, who lost the
The pardon on December 24th was the
election in 2016 by just 41,000 votes and
culmination of a turbulent fortnight that
has seemingly never got over it. Her Popu-
began when a congressional committee re-
lar Force party has 71 of the 130 seats in con-
ceived documents from Odebrecht, a Bra-
gress, whereas the president’s party won
zilian construction company at the heart
only 18. Having forced out several of his
of a vast corruption scandal across Latin
ministers, Popular Force backed a motion
America, showing that it had awarded con-
for impeachment on the grounds of “per-
sultancy contracts to companies linked to
manent moral incapacity” (an inheritance
Mr Kuczynski. This contradicted the presi-
from 19th-century constitutions intended
dent’s written testimony in October that
to deal with dementia in a president). 
he had no links, either direct or indirect, to
Many neutral observers saw impeach-
Odebrecht, which received many padded
ment, without thorough investigation, as
public contracts in Peru and has admitted
disproportionate. In defending himself, Mr
paying $29m in bribes in the country.
Kuczynski admitted he had been “insuﬃ-
Westﬁeld Capital, a boutique invest-
ciently forthcoming” but denied he was
ment bank wholly owned by Mr Kuczyn-
corrupt. He accused Popular Force of
ski, received $782,000 from Odebrecht for
mounting a parliamentary coup. Defeat
providing consultancy starting in 2004,
seemed inevitable, prompting several min-

isters to urge the president to resign. Yet the
opposition fell short of the two-thirds ma-
jority required, because Kenji Fujimori,
Keiko’s estranged brother, led ten Popular
Force deputies in abstaining.
Three days later Mr Kuczynski an-
nounced the pardon for Alberto Fujimori,
Peru’s president from 1990 to 2000 and its
most divisive ﬁgure. While many Peruvi-
ans credit Mr Fujimori with saving Peru’s
economy from hyperinﬂationary chaos
and eliminating the threat from Shining
Path, a Maoist terrorist group, he governed
as an autocrat and presided over systemat-
ic bribery and corruption. After being ex-
tradited from Chile, he was convicted on
four charges of corruption and one of com-
plicity in a death squad. He was sentenced
to 25 years in prison. Peru’s past two presi-
dential elections have been contests be-
tween Keiko Fujimori and anti-fujimo-
rismo—the country’s strongest political
current.

Not always divine
On December 24th Mr Kuczynski sum-
moned his ministers and congressmen “to
inform, not consult” them on the pardon,
according to one who was there. Few be-
lieve oﬃcial claims that it was because of
fears for Mr Fujimori’s health, and not a po-
litical deal struck with Kenji. Mr Kuczyn-
ski’s pardon extends to a pending case of
complicity in murder. 
He had trailed the possibility of the par-
don for months, but in a non-committal
way. A poll by Ipsos found that 56% fa-
voured the pardon. But 40% did not, and
many of them voted for Mr Kuczynski.
Three ministers and three of his congress-
men resigned in protest, as did a number
of mid-level oﬃcials. Tens of thousands of
Peruvians demonstrated on December
28th and more protests are planned. While
Mr Fujimori admitted that he had “let

1

28 The Amer icas

2 down [some] compatriots” after his par-
don and asked for their forgiveness, that
was less than the full-blown apology for
his crimes many would like. 
Starting with a reshuﬄe of his cabinet,
the president hopes to relaunch his gov-
ernment and seek a national consensus.
Ipsos found a slight bump in his approval
rating since mid-December, from 19% to
25%. But his situation now looks perilous,
for three reasons. 
Having forfeited much of his original
support, he has thrown himself on the un-
certain mercies of the fujimoristas. Popular
Force is an extension of the Fujimori family
saga. Seemingly fearful of being overshad-
owed by her father, Keiko did nothing to
speed his release. That task fell to Kenji,
who Ipsos ﬁnds is now slightly more pop-
ular than his sister. Whether the Fujimoris
unite or continue to ﬁght among them-
selves is an open question. Alberto Fuji-
mori expressed gratitude to Mr Kuczynski,
but even the slightest attempt on his part to
return to political life would hurt the gov-
ernment. Keiko faces two judicial investi-
gations
into Popular Force’s ﬁnances
which, unless halted, could see her jailed.
One concerns a text message on Marcelo
Odebrecht’s phone in which the construc-
tion tycoon, now under house arrest, ap-
peared to order an illegal $500,000 dona-
tion to her election campaign in 2011.
Then there is Mr Kuczynski’s own rela-
tionship with Odebrecht. In a new revela-
tion, Mr Odebrecht is said to have told Pe-
ruvian prosecutors in November that Mr
Kuczynski gave talks to the company’s
board. The president, who answered ques-
tions from an anti-corruption prosecutor
for four hours on December 28th, may also
be required to give evidence to a congres-
sional committee looking into Odebrecht,
one of whose managers is due to give fur-
ther testimony. 
In the eyes of many former supporters,
the president has forfeited the beneﬁt of
the doubt. 
“Before, many
people
thought...he was an upright ﬁgure,” El
Comercio, Peru’s establishment newspa-
per, wrote after the impeachment vote
(which it opposed) but before the pardon.
Now “few people don’t believe he has lied
many times to the country about his past
with Odebrecht.” It added that he should
“reﬂect on how little he has achieved”.
That is his third weakness. Mr Kuczyn-
ski is 79, and has far more experience in
banking and business than in politics. His
government has been largely aimless. Its
only tangible achievements are a welcome
but minor reduction in paperwork for pub-
lic services and an active foreign policy. It
has largely failed to get big public projects
going, as it promised. It commissioned a re-
port on creating a universal health, pen-
sions and social-protection system only to
shelve it. “I made many criticisms of Ku-
czynski but I never thought he would have

no idea of what to do when he got to the
presidency,” says Alfredo Barnechea, a de-
feated rival in the election in 2016.
There are few disagreements between
Mr Kuczynski and Keiko Fujimori on mac-
roeconomic policy. But Peru needs much
more than a stable economy. Some of
those who voted for the president did so
because they thought he believed in the
need for independent
institutions and
more professional public agencies. These
are things that Alberto Fujimori destroyed. 
The president is right that Peru needs to
move on from its disagreements about Mr
Fujimori. But Mr Kuczynski’s chance of do-
ing anything useful by the end of his term
in 2021 now looks vanishingly small. 7

Emeralds in Colombia

Prospectors,
barons and suits

M U Z O

Evil multinationals are giving miners
steady jobs
AT THE bottom of a muddy basin sur-
rounded by verdant mountains, Dora
Alicia Hernández combs through black
sludge and rock in the faint hope of ﬁnding
an emerald valuable enough to lift her out
of poverty. “All we need is one shiny
stone,” she says, as rainclouds smother the
mountains overhead. “Then we can get out
of here.”
Alicia is seeking fortune near Muzo, a
mountain town north of Bogotá that has
attracted guaqueros (prospectors) from
across Colombia since pre-colonial times.
The region is renowned for both the quali-

The Economist Januar y 6th 2018

ty and size of its emeralds. Of the 20 that
have sold at auction for more than
$100,000 a carat, 19 were from Muzo or
nearby. Guaqueros speak reverently of
Fura, an 11,000-carat rock named after a
mythical philandering wife who wept em-
eralds. Victor Carranza, who had started
out as a guaquero and became Colombia’s
emerald tsar, found it in 1999. As far as any-
one knows, it has never been sold.
A guaquero’s odds of making a Carran-
za-like fortune, never high, have become
fainter. That is not because there are no
other $100,000-a-carat emeralds some-
where in the mountains near Muzo, but be-
cause the hunt is being taken over by multi-
national companies. They oﬀer regular
jobs rather than a tantalising chance of
riches. But not every guaquero can get one,
and some prefer the thrill of the hunt to a
pay cheque. 
Before corporatisation came chaos.
Carranza employed his own army to ﬁght
rivals for control of the most productive
mines in the “green wars” of the 1960s and
1980s. Perhaps 6,000 people died. “We all
lost family and friends,” says William Nán-
dar, the ﬂamboyant director of Mina Real, a
locally owned mine. The winners man-
aged to legalise their claims. Drug-traﬃck-
ers tried to launder money through emer-
ald mining, Mr Nándar recalls, “but they
never made it past the private armies.” 
Guaqueros found opportunities amid
the turmoil, sifting waste extruded by the
mines and panning for stones in the Itoco
river. Those who worked for the mining
barons had livelihoods that were barely
more secure: instead of wages, they were
paid a cut of what they found. 
Things calmed down after the barons
made peace in 1990, Mr Nándar reminisces
while sitting beside an outdoor hot tub at

1

Better than a pay cheque

The Economist Januar y 6th 2018 

2 his hilltop mansion. Then came the suits.
Charles Burgess, an American, was the ﬁrst
to step out of a helicopter in 2009. He went
into business with Carranza, set up a com-
pany called MTC and brought in machin-
ery to widen the mines, making them
more productive. After Carranza died in
2013, MTC acquired his mines. 
Other foreign companies hope to emu-
late MTC. In Coscuez, 15km (ten miles) from
Muzo, a Dubai-based ﬁrm, Fura Gems, re-
cently bought a mine from a Colombian
businessman. Mina Real is seeking foreign
backers.
Miners employed by corporations
work regular hours and make at least the
minimum wage of 781,242 pesos ($270) a
month. Dina Luz Poveda earns nearly dou-
ble that as a safety inspector in a mine that
extends 1,000 metres into the side of a
mountain. That is a vast improvement
from her earlier job as an intermediary be-
tween guaqueros and visiting buyers.
“Now I can think about feeding my family,”
she says. “I don’t worry that all my money
gets spent on fuel because I know how
much money comes in.” 
Elin Bohórquez, Muzo’s mayor, thinks
the change is indisputably for the better.
“In the old days, as soon as guaqueros
earned the money with a big ﬁnd, they
spent it on liquor, on women, and what-
ever else,” he says. The companies main-
tain roads in an area largely neglected by
the state and claim to care about safety.
“We want to really focus on the safety of
our mine,” says Dev Shetty, Fura Gem’s In-
dian-born director. 
But many guaqueros, still dwelling in
mountainside shacks perched above
mineshafts, are unimpressed. In part that
is because there are not enough jobs for all
of them. MTC employs 800 people; Fura
Gems says it has hired “hundreds”. But
nearly 80% of Muzo’s workforce, including
guaqueros, is without formal employment.
Greener and cleaner than the emerald
barons, the companies leave less behind
for guaqueros to sift through. “Gallery
mines” bored into mountainsides have re-
placed open-cast mines, which have been
outlawed in Muzo. Rather than leave de-
bris for the guaqueros, the ﬁrms sift through
it themselves and pack it back into the
mines. “They are mosquitos, sucking our
blood,” complains Henry Pamplona, an el-
derly guaquero, as he shovels picked-over
grime into a wheelbarrow.
Guaqueros have protested sporadically.
In 2013 more than a thousand started dig-
ging on MTC’s land; three died when some
tunnels collapsed. A guaquero who calls
himself Caballo (Horse) wants at least to
force mining ﬁrms to leave some rubble be-
hind. He thinks organised protest can bring
that about. “We just need a leader who
says the right things,” he thinks. He is prob-
ably wrong. In Colombia’s emerald hills,
the day of the guaquero is over. 7

Canada

Shaming and
renaming

O T T AW A

The country is erasing European names
from its maps 
JEFFERY AMHERST, who commanded
British troops in North America during
the Seven Years War in the mid-18th cen-
tury, described indigenous people who
fought for France as an “execrable race”. He
called for their “total extirpation” and sug-
gested using dogs to hunt them down. 
Yet Amherst (pictured) was commemo-
rated in Canada (and in the United States)
mainly for establishing British supremacy
in North America. Schools, towns and
streets bear his name. That has started to
change in both countries. Amherst College
in Massachusetts no longer celebrates Lord
Jeﬀ as its mascot (but is keeping its name).
Canadians are scrubbing the names of
Amherst and of other colonial-era heroes
oﬀ street signs, school buildings and maps,
often replacing them with names drawn
from indigenous history. Montreal, the
largest city in French-speaking Quebec,
plans to erase a “stain on our history” by re-
naming Amherst Street, a 1.5km (0.9 mile)
thoroughfare, which was given its name by
British conquerors 200 years ago. The city
is looking for an indigenous substitute. 
About 30,000 of Canada’s 350,000
place names have indigenous origins, in-
cluding that of the country itself. Canada
comes from the Iroquoian word for “vil-
lage”. As indigenous groups grow more as-
sertive, and politicians become more sup-
portive of them, maps are being rewritten.
Justin Trudeau, Canada’s Liberal prime
minister, has promised to implement the
UN declaration on the rights of indigenous
peoples, which acknowledges their right
to keep indigenous names for communi-
ties and places. More than 600 indigenous

The Amer icas 29

place names were added to the national
registry in 2017, compared with 358 ﬁve
years earlier. In come cases, they are sup-
planting European-origin names.
Name-swapping is not easy. Local gov-
ernments, which normally make such de-
cisions, must consult residents, who often
disagree with one another. Provinces also
have a say. When Ottawa, named after the
Odawa indigenous group, merged with
surrounding municipalities in 2001, it
found itself with 80 streets that shared
their names with at least one other. Cana-
da’s capital saw that as a chance to give
more recognition to the region’s indige-
nous peoples. Some residents resisted. As a
result, it took the city until last November
to settle on Onigam Street, whose name
was drawn from the Algonquin word for
“portage”, as the replacement for one of its
River Streets. The job is still not done.
A decision may not end a dispute. A city
councillor in Edmonton, Alberta’s capital,
objected that Maskekosihk (“people of the
land of medicine”) Trail is harder to pro-
nounce than 23rd Avenue, its former name.
Cree groups retorted that they have coped
with tongue twisters ever since Europeans
arrived. (Canada’s longest one-word place
name, Pekwachnamaykoskwaskwaypin-
wanik, or “the lake where wild trout are
caught by ﬁshing with hooks”, in Manito-
ba, is a Cree confection.) The Northwest
Territories nearly changed its own name to
a much shorter one after part of it separat-
ed to form Nunavut in 1999. The govern-
ment sought suggestions on a website for a
new name; “Bob” came second. 
The Stoney Nakoda want to rename
Calgary, the largest city in Alberta, Wi-
chispa Oyade, which means “elbow
town”. The Blackfoot prefer Mohkinstsis-
aka-piyosis, which means “many houses
on the Elbow river”. The province has
shown no interest
in calling Calgary,
named after Scotland’s Calgary Bay, any-
thing else. The Northwest Territories dealt
with competing names for the Mackenzie
river by accepting all of them in 2015. It can
now be called the Dehcho, the Deho, the
Kuukpak, the Nagwichoonjik or the Gran-
de Rivière, all of which mean “great river”.
Mr Trudeau dropped the name of Hec-
tor-Louis Langevin, a founder of residen-
tial schools, which sought to sever indige-
nous children’s links to their families and
cultures, from the building that houses his
oﬃce. That suggests the renaming trend is
unlikely to abate. Indigenous groups want
the Cornwallis river in Nova Scotia, named
for a colonial governor who oﬀered a
bounty for the scalps of Mi’kmaq people,
to be called something else.
Montreal’s city council is debating who
should replace Amherst. One possibility is
Pontiac, an Odawa leader who rebelled
against Amherst’s rule. That dig at the Brit-
ish might please indigenous folk and
French speakers alike. 7

30

Middle East and Afr ica

Protests in Iran

When frustration boils over

T E H R A N

Iran is in turmoil, but the clerics and their allies remain as entrenched as ever
“NO TO high prices!”, “Down with
Frustrations have been piling up since
embezzlers!”, “People are paupers
Mr Rouhani’s victory in May. As a candi-
while the mullahs live like gods!” Are these
date he championed an inclusive, open
the chants of foreign-sponsored insurrec-
and reformed Iran. But his new cabinet ex-
tionists trying to create anarchy, insecurity
cluded women and Sunnis and contained
and intrigue in Iran? That is what the cleri-
few non-Persian minorities. Mr Rouhani
cal regime would have you believe, as it ig-
got out the women’s vote, but he has left
nores the economic grievances voiced by
most curbs on them in place, including a
the thousands of Iranians who have taken
ban on their presence in stadiums. 
to the streets in more than 70 towns and cit-
Perhaps, some surmised, the hard-
ies in the past week.
liners’ brief arrest of his brother had
Incredibly, the unrest seems to have
spooked him. A draft budget, presented to
been started by religious hardliners, hop-
parliament in December, would bloat the
ing to undermine the reformist presidency
coﬀers of the ayatollahs’ foundations and
of Hassan Rouhani. Stoking their anger
the Guards, but cut subsidies for the poor.
over the rising price of eggs, clerics in
The hashtag #pashimanam (we regret [our
Mashhad, Iran’s second city, urged hun-
vote]) went viral. Mr Rouhani’s supporters
dreds of their followers to protest on De-
say that by releasing an unusual amount of
cember 28th. Many demanded the presi-
dent’s resignation and called for fresh
elections—though Mr Rouhani was re-
elected just last year.
They could not have known what they
started. The protests quickly spread to oth-
er cities, and the tone also changed. It was
not just Mr Rouhani who should give up
power—so too should the ruling clerics
and their armed protectors in the Islamic
Revolutionary Guard Corps, said the new
protesters. “No to conservatives and re-
formers alike,” they chanted. Contrary to
the regime’s claims, no one seemed to be
leading the rallies, some of which turned
violent (though most have not).

S A U D I A R A B I A

I R A N

Recent protests

TURKMENISTAN

Th e
       Gu l f

Caspian
Sea

QATAR UAE

AZERBAIJAN

A

F

G
H
A
N

I

S
T

A
N

Tehran

Mashhad

KUWAIT

500 km

Y
E

K
R
U

T

I R A Q

Source: HRANA

Gulf of Oman

The Economist Januar y 6th 2018

Also in this section
31 The drug that is star ving Yemen
31 The balance shifts in Yemen’s war
32 Egypt’s absurd presidential race
33 The undemocratic Republic of Congo
33 Waiting for justice in Gambia
34 Liber ia’s new captain

For daily analysis and debate on the Middle East
and Afr ica, visit
Economist.com/world/middle-east-afr ica 

detail about the spending he aimed to em-
barrass the clerics.
It is mainly pent-up economic griev-
ances, not the political sort, that are at the
heart of the unrest. Even before the latest
protests, factory workers had gone on
strike over unpaid salaries and pensioners
had marched against low payments. Those
taking to the streets have wondered aloud
why so much of the country’s wealth has
gone to support violent groups in Yemen,
Lebanon and Gaza, and a dictator in Syria,
while their mostly rural provinces are ne-
glected. The unemployment rate is over
12% and at least one in four young people,
who make up the bulk of the protesters, are
without a job.

Egged on
The regime claims that the “sedition” is
over, but many Iranians still seethe with re-
sentment. Even so, a broader uprising does
not appear to be in the oﬃng. Tens of thou-
sands of people responded to the clerics’
call to counter-demonstrate on January
3rd. Most of Tehran, the capital and epi-
centre of past upheaval, has remained
calm, as the police arrest potential trouble-
makers and patrol the streets. Hundreds of
students have come out, but the middle
class, and even reformists, have so far sat
on the sidelines. Some fear a repeat of the
brutal crackdown that ended the Green
Movement, which challenged a dubious
presidential election in 2009. Others wor-
ry that the protests, which lack organisa-
tion, could get out of control. Indeed, they
did in a few towns, where police opened
ﬁre. Over 20 people have been killed.
Once again, the Guards have proved
that they are the regime’s backbone. The
authorities switched oﬀ messaging apps,
such as Telegram (which has 40m Iranian
subscribers and was the protesters’ main 

1

The Economist Januar y 6th 2018 

2 way of communicating), and VPNs, which
had oﬀered a backdoor to the internet. The
Guards hope to exploit the discontent with
Mr Rouhani to secure political gains. Liv-
ing standards, they remind Iranians, have
fallen under this president, but improved
when their man, Mahmoud Ahmadine-
jad, was in oﬃce (during a time of high oil
prices). When the 78-year-old supreme
leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, dies, they
will probably have the whiphand in deter-
mining who succeeds him.
Mr Rouhani, by contrast, has been
weakened. The unrest has tarnished his
image and dented his own hopes of replac-

Yemen

Qat wrenching

M A R I B

Famine in Yemen could be avoided by less chewing
YEMEN is on the brink of famine, say
aid agencies, which often blame the
civil war, Saudi Arabia’s blockade of
northern seaports and its bombing of
vital infrastructure. The government’s
refusal to pay salaries to employees in
rebel-held areas and the depreciation of
Yemen’s riyal mean many cannot aﬀord
the food that is available. But one of the
biggest causes of hunger often goes un-
mentioned: a leafy plant called qat.
The weed is Yemen’s most popular
drug: 90% of men and over a third of
women habitually chew its leaves, stor-
ing the masticated greenery in their
cheek until the narcotic seeps into their
bloodstream. In the past Yemenis might
indulge once a week and the practice was
largely conﬁned to the north-west moun-
tains, where qat grows. But following

Less jaw-jaw and war-war please

Middle East and Afr ica 31

ing Mr Khamenei. He seems stumped by
Iran’s economic problems and may try to
buy his way back into the good graces of
the public with increased spending. His
greatest success, the nuclear deal of 2015,
has brought oil-based growth, but not the
kind of broad development that he prom-
ised. Under the agreement, Iran agreed to
curb its nuclear programme in exchange
for America and other foreign powers lift-
ing most economic sanctions. But America
has maintained some (many relating to
Iran’s missile programme), which scare
away foreign banks and investors. The un-
rest has also not helped. France, which

seemed keen to engage Iran, is now more
hesitant. President Emmanuel Macron,
who was planning a visit, has called oﬀ a
trip by his foreign minister.
Over the past two years, millions of vot-
ers, who had sat out elections since 2009,
returned to the ballot box and chose
would-be 
reformers. Their victories
seemed to make Iran the Middle East’s
most vibrant democracy (apart from Isra-
el). But the inability of Mr Rouhani to im-
prove their lot has, once again, left many
feeling disillusioned. They are still trying to
ﬁnd a way to make their voices heard with-
out facing the wrath of the Guards. 7

Yemen’s war

The balance shifts

M A R I B

Yemen’s army is making gains against
the rebels, but victory is still far oﬀ
TAHER ALI AL-AUQAILI, the chief of
staﬀ of Yemen’s army, has a spring in
his step. After a year of stalemate, his ﬁve
fronts are moving again. As he darts be-
tween battleﬁelds hundreds of kilometres
apart, he speaks of victories in Beihan,
which have reconnected the road from his
headquarters in Marib to southern Yemen,
and in the Jawf region (see map). Troops
have also advanced 60km north along the
coast from Mokha towards Hodeida, the
main port of the rebels, called the Houthis.
From bases in the desert and coastal low-
lands, the alliance of forces arrayed against
the rebels is edging its way into the moun-
tains that shelter Yemen’s capital, Sana’a,
which is still in Houthi hands.
A string of events has led to the ad-
vance. In December the Houthis killed
their erstwhile ally, Ali Abdullah Saleh,
who had been Yemen’s president from
1978 to 2012, so the Houthis now ﬁght

1

S A U D I A R A B I A
D
B

Saada
Mazraq

Amran
Hajjah

Sana’a

Recent
military
gains

J A W F

H A D R A M A W T

Marib

Y E M E N
M

Beihan

Hodeida

R e d
S e a

E
E
R
R

Mokha

I
T
R
R
E
E
A
A

DJIBOUOUTTIII

Bayda

Taiz

Aden

G u l f o f A d e n

Areas where
al-Qaeda
operates

200 km

Areas of control, December 2017

Houthi

Saudi-led coalition

Sources: Risk Intelligence;
Cr itical Threats Project

S O M A L I A

uniﬁcation in 1990 it spread south. Now
qat markets bustle all over the country.
Men spend far more feeding their
addiction than their families: sometimes
$800 a month. Rather than searching for
weapons and other contraband, soldiers
extort bribes at checkpoints to pay for
their habit, jacking up transport costs.
And while the country runs out of basics,
such as wheat, its best farmland is de-
voted to producing the crop, which is
more lucrative. Cultivation of qat is said
to be increasing by 12% a year.
Oﬃcials refer to it as Yemen’s Viagra
and encourage its use. Taher Ali al-Au-
qaili, the army’s chief of staﬀ, says it is
“our whisky” and claims it gives his men
strength to ﬁght (see next article). Both
sides feed it to their child soldiers.
When local governors in Hadramawt,
the largest province, tried to revive an old
ban on consumption in their oﬃces, they
were summoned to Riyadh to join Ye-
men’s president, Abd Rabbo Mansour
Hadi, for a communal chew. Only al-
Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula has had
any success in banning it.
Northern Yemen is the region most
under threat of famine, but the Houthi
rebels who control it value their monopo-
ly on qat as much as Mr Hadi does his
hold on the country’s oil- and gasﬁelds. It
keeps roads open across enemy lines.
Dozens of trucks full of the harvest cross
into Marib each day. Taxes on qat also
earn both sides in the war big revenues.
Recent data are scarce, but back in 2000
the World Bank estimated that qat ac-
counted for 30% of Yemen’s economy.
Even the hungry cite an advantage: the
drug suppresses their appetite. But the
absurdity is not lost on all. In the words
of a southern oﬃcial, “We’re ﬁghting
Houthis with our arms and funding them
with our mouths.”

32 Middle East and Afr ica

2 alone. Arrests, killings and houses demol-
ished by tank shells in the capital have
stoked resentment against
the rebels.
Thousands of Mr Saleh’s people have ﬂed.
Tales of rebel atrocities have spurred on
the government’s forces. Fleeing Yemeni
journalists say the Houthis killed over 30
colleagues, including some who worked
for Mr Saleh’s media outlets. They say the
rebels extorted money from relatives
wanting to recover tortured bodies for bu-
rial. The Houthis, who claimed to champi-
on the mathlumeen, or oppressed masses,
may be turning into their oppressors.
As the rebels’ following shrinks, the
army’s may be growing. The conﬂict has of-
ten been depicted as a sectarian one be-
tween the Iranian-backed Houthis, who
follow the Zaydi branch of Shiism in the
highlands, and Sunnis in the lowlands
backed by their co-religionists in the Gulf.
But the ﬂight of hundreds of thousands of
displaced Yemenis is changing the sectari-
an make-up in the army’s ranks. General
Auqaili is a Zaydi from Houthi-held Am-
ran. The new security chief in Marib comes
from Amran, too. Moreover, he is a sayyid,
one of the scions of the Prophet Muham-
mad, a group that Houthis think should
rule the roost.
Mr Saleh’s death has also prompted the
rancorous regional coalition assembled
against the Houthis to bridge its diﬀer-
ences. Muhammad bin Zayed, the de facto
leader of the United Arab Emirates (UAE),
had long distrusted Yemen’s army. Many
of its soldiers support Islah, which has ties
to the Muslim Brotherhood, an Islamist
movement that the UAE abhors. Prince
Muhammad had hoped that Mr Saleh
would switch sides and boot the Houthis
from power. 
But since Mr Saleh’s death Prince Mu-
hammad has reconciled with Islah. He has
given army units loyal to the Islamists air
support. Government forces are on the
verge of breaking out of Taiz, Yemen’s
third-largest city, besieged by the Houthis
for almost three years. They hope to recap-
ture all of the coastal plain, where the
Houthis have little support. 
But this would still leave the army far
from total victory. The Houthis would be
hard to winkle out of the highlands. Their
mines, snipers and anti-tank missiles make
progress through the passes painfully slow,
complains General Auqaili. Moreover, be-
fore the Houthis ditched Mr Saleh, they
took control of an arsenal of tanks and mis-
siles from his Republican Guard, much of it
supplied by America when it saw Mr Saleh
as a bulwark against al-Qaeda. 
By contrast, General Auqaili complains
that his pleas for heavier weapons to
match the Houthis go unanswered. The
morale of his men is sapped because they
are nine months behind with their pay.
Some get by, selling weapons or informa-
tion to the Houthis or al-Qaeda. So ﬂush

are arms bazaars that prices are 20% lower
than before the war began in 2014. 
Perhaps the biggest reason for the stale-
mate, however, is that many Yemenis
beneﬁt from it. Warlords and soldiers at
checkpoints cream oﬀ humanitarian aid.
Cities like Marib bask in the oil wealth and
duties on electricity and imports that pre-
viously enriched the capital. Once notori-
ous as a hotspot for kidnappings on behalf
of al-Qaeda, it may now be Yemen’s safest
city. Banks and schools function. Wages are
paid on time. An oft-cited Yemeni adage
holds that one people’s misfortune is an-
other’s gain. 7

Egyptian politics

Cometh the hour,
cometh the ban

C A I R O

Several challengers could shake up the
presidential race, if they are allowed to
THE most interesting man in Egyptian
politics is trapped in a hotel. On No-
vember 29th Ahmed Shaﬁq announced
that he would run for president. The for-
mer prime minister is best known for los-
ing the presidential race in 2012 to Muham-
mad Morsi of the Muslim Brotherhood,
who was himself toppled in a coup the fol-
lowing year. Hours after his announce-
ment Mr Shaﬁq claimed that he was barred
from leaving Abu Dhabi, where he lived in
self-imposed exile. But his hosts said he
was free to go—and then kicked him out.
After arriving in Cairo Mr Shaﬁq disap-
peared for a night. He resurfaced the next
evening for a bizarre televised interview.
“I’m not kidnapped or anything,” he said.
His home just needed renovations and the

Shaﬁq, a killer candidate

The Economist Januar y 6th 2018

authorities arranged alternative accom-
modation, he explained. “I was taken to
one of the most distinguished hotels in the
area.” It must be comfortable there, for Mr
Shaﬁq has not been seen in public since.
Journalists who tried to meet him were
chased away by plain-clothed goons.
Egyptians expect that their presidential
election this spring will be a rerun of 2014,
when Abdel-Fattah al-Sisi won 97% of the
vote. His only opponent ﬁnished third in
the two-man race (invalid ballots came sec-
ond). Though Mr Sisi has not formally an-
nounced his candidacy, a suspiciously
well-funded “grassroots” campaign has
plastered posters of his image all over Cai-
ro. MPs talk of amending the constitution
to extend his next four-year term to six, or
to allow him a third. 
Nevertheless, a list of would-be chal-
lengers is emerging. Start with the long
shots, such as Khaled Ali, a liberal lawyer
and activist, who hopes to save Egypt from
what he calls its “dark destiny”. Mr Ali was
convicted of “public indecency” last year
for making an obscene hand gesture. If the
trumped-up case is not overturned on ap-
peal, he is disqualiﬁed from running. The
candidacy of Colonel Ahmed Konsawa, an
obscure army oﬃcer, is in similar trouble.
He was arrested within days of announc-
ing his bid for expressing political views
while in uniform.
It would be harder to silence Muham-
mad Anwar Sadat, a nephew of the slain
former president. Mr Sadat is a genuine lib-
eral, a rarity in Egyptian politics. A former
MP, he was booted out of the legislature
last year for being too critical of the govern-
ment. The army has tried to recruit him to
run, to give the election a sheen of legiti-
macy. But so far he has demurred.
That leaves Mr Shaﬁq. In 2012 he cam-
paigned on public order, repeating the
word istiqrar (stability) at every turn. On
the stump he often seemed unstable, slur-
ring his way through gaﬀe-prone speeches.
During a televised debate, he oﬀered a
memorable summary of his service in the
war against Israel in 1973: “I killed and was
killed!” Still, he came within 900,000
votes of defeating Mr Morsi. He now
claims to be a champion of human
rights—an absurd turnabout for an ally of
Hosni Mubarak, the long-serving dictator.
His candidacy has more to do with
grumbling amongst
the Egyptian elite,
who are concerned about Mr Sisi’s eco-
nomic management. Army oﬃcers are un-
happy with the struggling campaign
against jihadists in Sinai.
Mr Sisi has the perks of incumbency: a
pliant parliament, a repressive police force
and an iron grip on the media. One MP
wants to strip Mr Shaﬁq of his citizenship
for “betraying his homeland”. Last month
three of his supporters were charged with
harming national security. He may be in
for a long stay at the Marriott. 7

The Economist Januar y 6th 2018 

The undemocratic Republic of Congo

Never-ending term

An embattled president survives
another year of unconstitutional rule
ON THE streets of Kinshasa, the rau-
cous, ramshackle capital of the Demo-
cratic Republic of Congo (DRC), it is now
diﬃcult for foreigners to walk through mar-
kets without being accosted by secret po-
licemen, nor to do so without also hearing
from shoppers and market traders how
much they hate Joseph Kabila, the coun-
try’s president. As 2018 starts, Africa’s
youngest head of state (Mr Kabila is only
46, despite having ruled for 17 years) is also
one of the continent’s most embattled.
On New Year’s Eve at least seven people
were killed in protests against the govern-
ment. Before the demonstrations the
Congolese government shut down much
of the mobile-phone network to hamper
their organisers. These were the ﬁrst major
protests in Kinshasa in a year and were but
the latest in a string of problems for a presi-
dent who did not bother to organise elec-
tions and has continued to rule unconstitu-
tionally since his term of oﬃce ran out in
December 2016. 
On December 21st the American gov-
ernment imposed sanctions on one of his
chums: Dan Gertler, an Israeli billionaire
with mining and oil interests across the
country. America’s Treasury Department
said Mr Gertler had “amassed his fortune
through hundreds of millions of dollars’
worth of opaque and corrupt mining and
oil deals”. On Christmas Day armed men
burned down one of Mr Kabila’s palaces,
in North Kivu. A police oﬃcer was killed;
several vehicles were destroyed. 
Mr Gertler, who once claimed that he
should get a Nobel prize for his work in
Congo, to which he commutes from Tel
Aviv weekly, has for years acted as a
middleman between multinational min-

ing ﬁrms and the state. According to the US
Treasury, between 2010 and 2012 the losses
to the Congolese state from the underpric-
ing of mines and mining licences handled
by Mr Gertler came to more than $1.36bn.
By imposing sanctions on Mr Gertler,
America will make it more diﬃcult for Mr
Kabila to raise money to keep his patron-
age machine well-oiled. 
If Mr Kabila is to stay in power, he will
need to be able to dole out something. At
the end of 2016 the president narrowly
avoided huge street protests by agreeing to
a deal with the political opposition to stay
in power for one more year while elections
were organised. That year has now passed
and Mr Kabila is still in oﬃce, though inter-
national pressure is mounting. Nikki Ha-
ley, Donald Trump’s ambassador to the
UN, said in October after a meeting with
Mr Kabila that America would withhold
support for a UN peacekeeping mission in
the country if he did not commit to holding
elections in 2018. Since then Corneille Nan-
gaa, the president of the electoral commis-
sion, has said that voter registration is pro-
ceeding and an election will be held on
December 23rd. 
In the meantime, the president has to
hold on to his territory. The attack on his
compound in North Kivu is merely the lat-
est evidence of worsening security in the
east, the birthplace of his father’s Rwan-
dan-sponsored rebellion against Mobutu
Sese Seko in 1997. Earlier in December, 15
UN peacekeepers were killed in a single at-
tack blamed on the Allied Democratic
Forces, a brutal rebel group that has its ori-
gins in Uganda. Fighting has also intensi-
ﬁed in South Kivu. In September, a militia
launched an audacious marine assault on
Uvira, a large city on Lake Tanganyika.
In the ﬁrst half of 2017, 1m people were
displaced by conﬂict. Hundreds of thou-
sands of children are at risk of starvation in
Kasai because of ﬁghting. And yet Mr Ka-
bila holds on, getting ever weaker, but
seemingly without any exit plan or any
hope of reasserting control. His country is
at risk of falling back into civil war for the
third time in two decades. 7

More of the same

Middle East and Afr ica 33

Gambia

Waiting for
Jammeh

B A N J U L

The former dictator’s victims hope for
justice
YAHYA JAMMEH, who ruled Gambia
from 1994 to 2017, claimed he could cure
people of HIV with his bare hands. The
probability of such faith-healing working
is zero. Today the law is trying to lay hands
on Mr Jammeh. At ﬁrst glance, the chance
of it succeeding is only slightly higher. 
In January 2017, two months after losing
an election, he agreed to step down, hav-
ing been warned by fellow west African
leaders that he would be removed by force
if he clung to power any longer. In return
for going without a ﬁght, he was given asy-
lum in Equatorial Guinea, an even worse
African dictatorship. Teodoro Obiang, its
president for the past 38 years, has never
signed up to the International Criminal
Court (ICC), which means that Mr Jammeh
(pictured) cannot be extradited for trial. He
passes his time farming on one of Mr
Obiang’s grace-and-favour estates. 
For those who were beaten with metal
pipes or had plastic bags put over their
heads by Mr Jammeh’s goons, the only
hope for justice is either to persuade Mr
Obiang to hand him back, or to wait for a
more human-rights-friendly government
to take over in Equatorial Guinea. Neither
seems likely. However, campaigners such
as Amadou Scattred Janneh, who was
once jailed by Mr Jammeh for printing T-
shirts calling for his downfall, argue that all
is not lost. Where international justice is
concerned, good things can come to those
who wait.
In 2016 Chad’s ex-despot, Hissène Ha-
bré, was jailed for life by a court in Senegal 

1

34 Middle East and Afr ica

2 for the murder of perhaps 40,000 people
in the 1980s. Again, the case was beset by
political obstacles, not least from the Sene-
galese government, which arrested Habré
in 2000 but then dragged its feet. Senegal’s
then president, Abdoulaye Wade, heeded
other African politicians, who whispered
that prosecuting Mr Habré would set an
unwelcome precedent that people like
themselves could be held accountable.
However, in 2012 Mr Wade was replaced
by Macky Sall, who thought that setting
such a precedent was an excellent idea. 
Some of Mr Habré’s victims, who had
campaigned relentlessly to prevent the
world from forgetting about his crimes, are
now advising Mr Jammeh’s victims, who
have formed their own campaign group
and are gathering evidence. “We know it’s
not going to be easy, but we are ready for a
long struggle,” says Mr Janneh. Mean-
while, Gambian police have opened 35 in-
vestigations into alleged killings by Mr
Jammeh’s regime, one of which has al-
ready reached court.
Separately, a special commission into
Mr Jammeh’s ﬁnancial dealings has uncov-
ered further evidence that he embezzled
on a massive scale. Staﬀ from the Gambian
Central Bank and the National Petroleum
Corporation have told how he used the or-
ganisations as if they were his personal
cash machines, withdrawing up to $2m at
a time. A watertight criminal case against
Mr Jammeh, though, will not be enough to
get him in the dock. A convincing political
case will have to be made, too.
Under the new presidency of Adama
Barrow, Gambia has already rejoined the
ICC, from which his predecessor had with-
drawn. But if he were prosecuted, Mr Jam-
meh, like Mr Habré, would probably go be-
fore a specially convened local court, in
order to make justice look African.
Setting up such a tribunal is costly.
Moreover, before it went ahead, fellow Af-
rican leaders would ﬁrst have to lean
heavily on Mr Obiang to hand Mr Jammeh
over. Right now, there is little sign of any of
them wanting to do so. Sources within the
Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS), the main regional power
bloc, say that prosecuting Mr Jammeh is
not a priority. Nor is it one for Mr Barrow’s
government, which fears the risk of ruc-
tions from Mr Jammeh’s old supporters.
Still, the victims’ groups may be able to
cultivate a few powerful allies. Mr Sall,
Senegal’s president, is no friend of Mr Jam-
meh, who sheltered armed separatists
from Senegal’s Casamance region. Like-
wise, Ghana is under pressure to bring jus-
tice for 44 Ghanaian migrants allegedly
murdered in 2005 by Mr Jammeh’s securi-
ty forces (who mistook them for mercenar-
ies). If enough people with enough scores
to settle get together, this may one day en-
sure that Mr Jammeh, the dictator-turned-
farmer, ﬁnally reaps what he sowed. 7

Liber ia

The new skipper

The election marks Liberia’s ﬁrst
democratic transfer of power since 1944
FOOTBALLING superstar George Weah
has scored again. As the only African
footballer to have been awarded both
FIFA’s World Player of the Year and
France’s Ballon d’Or, Mr Weah, a Liberian,
is used to winning. However, one prize had
evaded him—until this year.
On December 26th the former Chelsea,
AC Milan and Paris Saint-Germain player
triumphed in the second round of Liberia’s
presidential election. Mr Weah defeated
the current vice-president, Joseph Boakai,
with 62% of the vote. He won all but one of
Liberia’s 15 counties.
Mr Weah’s victory is a big milestone for
the nascent democracy. Liberia suﬀered
two brutal civil wars between 1989 and
2003. An estimated 250,000 people died
and perhaps 90% of the economy was
wiped out. In 1997, during a period of
peace, Charles Taylor, a warlord, became
president, having made it clear that he
would go back to war if not elected. Sup-
porters chanted, “He killed my ma, he
killed my pa, but I’ll vote for him.” 
When Mr Weah’s term kicks oﬀ in Janu-
ary, by contrast, it will be Liberia’s ﬁrst
peaceful transfer of power from one elect-
ed president to another since 1944. The run-
oﬀ vote was delayed by a legal challenge to
the ﬁrst round of the election (in which Mr
Weah came ﬁrst with 38% of the vote to Mr
Boakai’s 29%). The second round eventual-
ly proceeded with no violence, though
turnout was only 56%, compared with 75%
in the ﬁrst round in October.

The Economist Januar y 6th 2018

Mr Weah 
is
idolised, particularly
among the young—and more than half the
electorate is under 33. He lost to the current
president, Ellen Johnson Sirleaf, in 2005. A
former World Banker, she generated a
surge of enthusiasm for having neither
blood on her hands nor loot in her pockets.
However, she failed to curb corruption ad-
equately or ﬁx Liberia’s woeful schools
and clinics. Voters cried foul. 
The incoming vice-president, Jewel
Howard-Taylor, is a popular senator who
once tried to make homosexuality punish-
able by death. She is also Mr Taylor’s ex-
wife, which helped attract voters who still
support the former tyrant (who is now in
prison in Britain for war crimes committed
in neighbouring Sierra Leone).
For Mr Boakai, incumbency was a dis-
advantage. The 73-year-old tried to shrug
oﬀ his association with Ms Johnson Sirleaf.
He compared himself to a “race car in the
garage”, the potential of which was yet to
be realised. However, his reputation for
falling asleep in public earned him the
nickname “Sleepy Joe”. Mr Weah darted
past. Tellingly, Ms Johnson Sirleaf, a win-
ner of the Nobel peace prize, did not cam-
paign with her deputy and even inaugurat-
ed a road along with Mr Weah just days
before the election.
Yet there are doubts about the kind of
leader Mr Weah will be. Since his election
as a senator in 2014, he has rarely attended
parliament. Nor has he introduced or co-
sponsored any legislation. Mr Weah’s rela-
tive lack of education, though, only seems
to make him more popular. His supporters
see the former slum-dweller as one of
them—a champion from their streets. 
Much will depend on the ministers and
advisers with whom he surrounds him-
self. Liberia needs better
roads and
schools, more jobs and electricity, and a
thousand other things. Presidents, unlike
footballers, must aim at multiple goals. 7

Capping this

TECHNOLOGY QUARTERLY  January 6th 2018     
BRAIN-COMPUTER INTERFACES

Thought
experiments

TECHNOLOGY QUARTERLY

Brain-computer inter faces

Brains and machines

Thought exper iments

Brain-computer inter faces sound like the stuﬀ of science ﬁction. Andrew Palmer sorts the reality

from the hypeI N THE gleaming facilities of the Wyss Centre
for Bio and Neuroengineering in Geneva, a lab
technician takes a well plate out of an incuba-
tor. Each well contains a tiny piece of brain tis-
sue derived from human stem cells and sitting
on top of an array of electrodes. A screen dis-
plays what the electrodes are picking up: the character-
istic peak-and-trough wave forms of ﬁring neurons.
To see these signals emanating from disembodied
tissue is weird. The ﬁring of a neuron is the basic build-
ing block of intelligence. Aggregated and combined,
such “action potentials” retrieve every memory, guide
every movement and marshal every thought. As you
read this sentence, neurons are ﬁring all over your
brain: to make sense of the shapes of the letters on the
page; to turn those shapes into phonemes and those
phonemes into words; and to confer meaning on
those words. 
This symphony of signals is bewilderingly com-
plex. There are as many as 85bn neurons in an adult
human brain, and a typical neuron has 10,000 connec-
tions to other such cells. The job of mapping these con-
nections is still in its early stages. But as the brain gives
up its secrets, remarkable possibilities have opened
up: of decoding neural activity and using that code to
control external devices. 

ALSO IN THIS TQ

Non-invasive devices

Headache

Implants

Inside intelligence

Data processing

Translation required

Brain scan

Eberhard Fetz

Looking for
serendipity

Grey matter, red tape

A channel of communication of this sort requires a
brain-computer interface (BCI). Such things are al-
ready in use. Since 2004, 13 paralysed people have
been implanted with a system called BrainGate, ﬁrst
developed at Brown University (a handful of others
have been given a similar device). An array of small
electrodes, called a Utah array, is implanted into the
motor cortex, a strip of the brain that governs move-
ment. These electrodes detect the neurons that ﬁre
when someone intends to move his hands and arms.
These signals are sent through wires that poke out of
the person’s skull to a decoder, where they are translat-
ed into a variety of outputs, from moving a cursor to
controlling a limb. 
The system has allowed a woman paralysed by a
stroke to use a robotic arm to take her ﬁrst sip of coﬀee
without help from a caregiver. It has also been used by
a paralysed person to type at a rate of eight words a mi-
nute. It has even reanimated useless human limbs. In a
study led by Bob Kirsch of Case Western Reserve Uni-
versity, published in the Lancet this year, BrainGate
was deployed artiﬁcially to stimulate muscles in the
arms of William Kochevar, who was paralysed in a cy-
cling accident. As a result, he was able to feed himself
for the ﬁrst time in eight years. 
Interactions between brains and machines have 

1

The Economist Januar y 6th 2018

3

TECHNOLOGY QUARTERLY Brain-computer inter faces

2

changed lives in other ways, too. The opening ceremony of the
football World Cup in Brazil in 2014 featured a paraplegic man
who used a mind-controlled robotic exoskeleton to kick a ball. A
recent study by Ujwal Chaudhary of the University of Tübingen
and four co-authors relied on a technique called functional near-
infrared spectroscopy (fNIRS), which beams infrared light into the
brain, to put yes/no questions to four locked-in patients who had
been completely immobilised by Lou Gehrig’s disease; the pa-
tients’ mental responses showed up as identiﬁable patterns of
blood oxygenation. 
Neural activity can be stimulated as well as recorded. Cochlear
implants convert sound into electrical signals and send them into
the brain. Deep-brain stimulation uses electrical pulses, delivered
via implanted electrodes, to help control Parkinson’s disease. The
technique has also been used to treat other movement disorders
and mental-health conditions. NeuroPace, a Silicon Valley ﬁrm,
monitors brain activity for signs of imminent epileptic seizures
and delivers electrical stimulation to stop them.
It is easy to see how brain-computer interfaces could be ap-
plied to other sensory inputs and outputs. Researchers at the Uni-
versity of California, Berkeley, have deconstructed electrical activ-
ity in the temporal lobe when someone is listening to con-
versation; these patterns can be used to predict what word
someone has heard. The brain also produces similar signals when
someone imagines hearing spoken words, which may open the
door to a speech-processing device for people with conditions
such as aphasia (the inability to understand or produce speech). 
Researchers at the same university have used changes in blood
oxygenation in the brain to reconstruct, fuzzily, ﬁlm clips that peo-
ple were watching. Now imagine a device that could work the oth-
er way, stimulating the visual cortex of blind people in order to
project images into their mind’s eye. 
If the possibilities of BCIs are enormous, however, so are the
problems. The most advanced science is being conducted in ani-
mals. Tiny silicon probes called Neuropixels have been developed
by researchers at the Howard Hughes Institute, the Allen Institute
and University College London to monitor cellular-level activity
in multiple brain regions in mice and rats. Scientists at the Univer-
sity of California, San Diego, have built a BCI that can predict from
prior neural activity what song a zebra ﬁnch will sing. Researchers
at the California Institute of Technology have worked out how

Let me think

Brain-computer inter face components

Ultimately
it may be
possible to
meld
together
human and
ar tiﬁcial
intelligence

cells in the visual cortex of macaque mon-
keys encoded 50 diﬀerent aspects of a per-
son’s face, from skin colour to eye spacing.
That enabled them to predict the appear-
ance of faces that monkeys were shown
from the brain signals they detected, with a
spooky degree of accuracy. But conducting
scientiﬁc research on human brains is
harder, for regulatory reasons and because
they are larger and more complex.
Even when BCI breakthroughs are
made on humans in the lab, they are diﬃ-
cult to translate into clinical practice. Wired
magazine ﬁrst reported breathlessly on the
then new BrainGate system back in 2005.
An early attempt to commercialise the
technology, by a company called Cyberki-
netics, foundered. It took NeuroPace 20
years to develop its technologies and nego-
tiate regulatory approval, and it expects
that only 500 people will have its elec-
trodes implanted this year. 
Current BCI technologies often require
experts to operate them. “It is not much use
if you have to have someone with a mas-
ters in neural engineering standing next to
the patient,” says Leigh Hochberg, a neu-
rologist and professor at Brown University, who is one of the key
ﬁgures behind BrainGate. Whenever wires pass through the skull
and scalp, there is an infection risk. Implants also tend to move
slightly within the brain, which can harm the cells it is recording
from; and the brain’s immune response to foreign bodies can
create scarring around electrodes, making them less eﬀective. 
Moreover, existing implants record only a tiny selection of the
brain’s signals. The Utah arrays used by the BrainGate consor-
tium, for example, might pick up the ﬁring of just a couple of hun-
dred neurons out of that 85bn total. In a paper published in 2011,
Ian Stevenson and Konrad Kording of Northwestern University
showed that the number of simultaneously recorded neurons had
doubled every seven years since the 1950s (see chart). This falls far
short of Moore’s law, which has seen computing power double ev-

1

N

e

u

r

o
n

Signal acquisition

The action potentials of
neurons are recorded. 
Non-invasive recording 
techniques include 
electroencephalograms 
and near-infrared 
spectroscopy; invasive 
techniques typically use 
implanted electrodes

Simultaneously recorded neurons

Log scale

1,000

100

10

1

Decoding

Frontal lobe 

Functional areas of the brain

Movement
Problem-solving
Concentrating, thinking
Behaviour, personality
and mood
Control of voluntary
muscles

Temporal lobe 

Hearing
Language
Memory
Smell
High-level
visual
processing

(faces & scenes)

Brain signals are 
processed, usually with 
machine-learning 
techniques. Pattern 
recognition leads to the 
generation of a control 
signal

Application

The control signal 
causes a change to an 
external device. Brain- 
computer interfaces can 
also be used to 
stimulate the brain

A

1960

70

80

90

2000

10

Cursors

Wheelchairs

Spellers

Robotic arms

Other

Sources: Nature Neuroscience; Patrick Lynch; The Economist

Par ietal lobe 

Sensations
Language
Perception
Body awareness
Attention

Occipital lobe 

Vision
Perception
Dreams

Cerebellum

Posture
Balance
Co-ordination
of movement
Fear and
pleasure

Brain stem

Consciousness
Breathing
Heart rate

4

The Economist Januar y 6th 2018

2

ery two years.
Indeed, the Wyss Centre in Geneva exists because it is so hard
to get neurotechnology out of the lab and into clinical practice.
John Donoghue, who heads the centre, is another of the pioneers
of the BrainGate system. He says it is designed to help promising
ideas cross several “valleys of death”. One is ﬁnancial: the combi-
nation of lengthy payback periods and deep technology scares oﬀ
most investors. Another is the need for multidisciplinary exper-
tise to get better interfaces built and management skills to keep
complex projects on track. Yet another is the state of neuroscience
itself. “At its core, this is based on understanding how the brain
works, and we just don’t,” says Dr Donoghue.

Me, myself and AI
This odd mixture of extraordinary achievement and halting pro-
gress now has a new ingredient: Silicon Valley. In October 2016
Bryan Johnson, an entrepreneur who had made a fortune by sell-
ing his payments company, Braintree, announced an investment
of $100m in Kernel, a ﬁrm he has founded to “read and write neu-
ral code”. Mr Johnson reckons that the rise of artiﬁcial intelligence
(AI) will demand a concomitant upgrade in human capabilities. “I
ﬁnd it hard to imagine a world by 2050 where we have not inter-
vened to improve ourselves,” he says, picturing an ability to ac-
quire new skills at will or to communicate telepathically with oth-
ers. Last February Kernel snapped up Kendall Research Systems, a
spinoﬀ from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) that
works on neural interfaces. 
Kernel is not alone in seeing BCIs as a way for humans to co-ex-
ist with AI rather than be subjugated to it. In 2016 Elon Musk, the
boss of SpaceX and Tesla, founded a new company called Neura-
link, which is also working to create new forms of implants. He
has gathered together an impressive group of co-founders and set
a goal of developing a BCI for clinical use in people with disabil-
ities by 2021. Devices for people without such disabilities are
about eight to ten years away, by Mr Musk’s reckoning.
Neuralink is not saying what exactly it is doing, but Mr Musk’s
thinking is outlined in a lengthy post on Wait But Why, a website.
In it, he describes the need for humans to communicate far more
quickly with each other, and with computers, if they are not to be
left in the dust by AI. The post raises some extraordinary possibili-
ties: being able to access and absorb knowledge instantly from the
cloud or to pump images from one person’s retina straight into the
visual cortex of another; creating entirely new sensory abilities,
from infrared eyesight to high-frequency hearing; and ultimately,
melding together human and artiﬁcial intelligence. 
In April it was Facebook’s turn to boggle minds as it revealed
plans to create a “silent speech” interface that would allow people
to type at 100 words a minute straight from their brain. A group of
more than 60 researchers, some inside Facebook and some out-
side, are working on the project. A separate startup, Openwater, is
also working on a non-invasive neural-imaging system; its foun-
der, Mary Lou Jepsen, says that her technology will eventually al-
low minds to be read. 
Many BCI experts react to the arrival of the Valley visionaries
by rolling their eyes. Neuroscience is a work in progress, they say.
An eﬀective BCI requires the involvement of many disciplines:
materials science, neuroscience, machine learning, engineering,
design and others. There are no shortcuts to clinical trials and reg-
ulatory approval.
In all this, the sceptics are right. Many of the ambitions being
aired look fantastical. Still, this is a critical moment for BCIs. Vast
amounts of money are pouring into the ﬁeld. Researchers are try-
ing multiple approaches. Mr Musk in particular has a track record
of combining grandiose aspirations (colonising Mars) and practi-
cal success (recovering and relaunching rockets via SpaceX). 
To be clear, “The Matrix” is not imminent. But BCIs may be
about to take a big leap forward. For that to happen, the most im-
portant thing is to ﬁnd a better way of connecting with the brain. 7

The Economist Januar y 6th 2018

TECHNOLOGY QUARTERLY Brain-computer inter faces

Non-invasive devices

Headache

Can the brain be deciphered without opening up the skull?

PATRICK KAIFOSH’S left hand lies ﬂat on the table in front
of him. Occasionally his ﬁngers twitch or his palm rises
up slightly from the surface. There is nothing obvious to
connect these movements with what is happening on the
tablet in front of him, where a game of asteroids is being
played. Yet he is controlling the spaceship on the screen as
it spins, thrusts and ﬁres. 
What enables him to do so is a sweatband studded with small
gold bars that sits halfway up his left forearm. Each bar contains a
handful of electrodes designed to pick up the signals of motor un-
its (the combination of a motor neuron, a cell that projects from
the spinal cord, and the muscle ﬁbres it controls). These data are
processed by machine-learning algorithms and translated into the
actions in the game. Dr Kaifosh, a co-founder of CTRL-Labs, the
startup behind the device, has learned to exercise impressive con-
trol over these signals with hardly any obvious movement. 
Some say that the claims of Dr Kaifosh and Thomas Reardon,
his co-founder, that CTRL-Labs has created a brain-machine inter-
face are nonsense. The sweatband is nowhere near the brain, and
the signals it is picking up are generated not just by the ﬁring of a
motor neuron but by the electrical activity of muscles. “If this is a
BCI, then the movement of my ﬁngers when I type on a keyboard
is also a brain output,” sniﬀs one researcher. Krishna Shenoy, who
directs the neural prosthetics systems lab at Stanford University
and acts as an adviser to the ﬁrm, thinks it is on the right side of the
divide. “Measuring the movement of the hand is motion capture.
They are picking up neural activity ampliﬁed by the muscles.”

1

5

2

TECHNOLOGY QUARTERLY Brain-computer inter faces

It is not
reasonable
to expect
consumers
to undergo
brain
surger y

Whatever the semantics, it is instructive
to hear the logic behind the ﬁrm’s decision
to record the activity of the peripheral ner-
vous system, rather than looking directly
inside the head. The startup wants to create
a consumer product (its potential uses in-
clude being an interface for interactions in
virtual reality and augmented reality). It is
not reasonable to expect consumers to un-
dergo brain surgery, say the founders, and
current non-invasive options for reading
the brain provide noisy, hard-to-read sig-
nals. “For machine-learning folk, there is
no question which data set—cortical neu-
rons or motor neurons—you would prefer,”
says Dr Reardon.
This trade-oﬀ between the degree of in-
vasiveness and the ﬁdelity of brain signals
is a big problem in the search for improved
BCIs. But plenty of people are trying to ﬁnd
a better way to read neural code from out-
side the skull.
The simplest way to read electrical ac-
tivity from outside is to conduct an electro-
encephalogram (EEG). And it is not all that
simple. Conventionally, it has involved wearing a cap containing
lots of electrodes that are pressed against the surface of the scalp.
To improve the signal quality, a conductive gel is often applied.
That requires a hairwash afterwards. Sometimes the skin of the
scalp is roughened up to get a better connection. As a consumer ex-
perience it beats going to the dentist, but not by much.
Once on, each electrode picks up currents generated by the ﬁr-
ing of thousands of neurons, but only in the area covered by that
electrode. Neurons that ﬁre deep in the brain are not detected ei-
ther. The signal is distorted by the layers of skin, bone and mem-
brane that separate the brain from the electrode. And muscle ac-
tivity (of the sort that CTRL-Labs looks for) from eye and neck
movements or clenched jaws can overwhelm the neural data. 
Even so, some EEG signals are strong enough to be picked up
pretty reliably. An “event-related potential”, for example, is an
electrical signal that the brain reliably gives oﬀ in response to an
external stimulus of some sort. One such, called an error-related
potential (Errp), occurs when a user spots a mistake. Researchers
at MIT have connected a human observer wearing an EEG cap to
an industrial robot called Baxter as it carried out a sorting task. If
Baxter made a mistake, an Errp signal in the observer’s brain alert-
ed the robot to its error; helpfully, if Baxter still did not react, the
human brain generated an even stronger Errp signal.

If the cap ﬁts
Neurable, a consumer startup, has developed an EEG headset
with just seven dry electrodes which uses a signal called the P300
to enable users to play a virtual-reality (VR) escape game. This sig-
nal is a marker of surprise or recognition. Think of the word
“brain” and then watch a series of letters ﬂash up randomly on a
screen; when the letter “b” comes up, you will almost certainly be
giving oﬀ a P300 signal. In Neurable’s game, all you have to do is
concentrate on an object (a ball, say) for it to come towards you or
be hurled at an object. Ramses Alcaide, Neurable’s boss, sees the
potential for entertainment companies like Disney (owner of the
Star Wars and Marvel franchises) to license the software in theme
parks and arcade games. 
Thorsten Zander of the Technische Universität in Berlin thinks
that “passive” EEG signals (those that are not evoked by an exter-
nal stimulus) can be put to good use too. Research has shown that
brainwave activity changes depending on how alert, drowsy or
focused a person is. If an EEG can reliably pick this up, perhaps sur-
geons, pilots or truck drivers who are becoming dangerously tired

can be identiﬁed. Studies have shown strong correlations be-
tween people’s mental states as shown by an EEG and their ability
to spot weapons in X-rays of luggage. 
Yet the uses of EEGs remain limited. In a real-world environ-
ment like a cockpit, a car or an airport, muscle activity and ambi-
ent electricity are likely to confound any neural signals. As for
Neurable’s game, it relies not solely on brain activity but also de-
ploys eye-tracking technology to see where a player is looking. Dr
Alcaide says the system can work with brain signals alone, but it is
hard for a user to disentangle the two.
Other non-invasive options also have ﬂaws. Magnetoencepha-
lography measures magnetic ﬁelds generated by electrical activity
in the brain, but it requires a special room to shield the machinery
from Earth’s magnetic ﬁeld. Functional magnetic resonance imag-
ing (fMRI) can spot changes in blood oxygenation, a proxy for neu-
ral activity, and can zero in on a small area of the brain. But it in-
volves a large, expensive machine, and there is a lag between
neural activity and blood ﬂow. 
If any area is likely to yield a big breakthrough in non-invasive
recording of the brain, it is a variation on fNIRS, the infrared tech-
nique used in the experiment to allow locked-in patients to com-
municate. In essence, light sent through the skull is either ab-
sorbed or reﬂected back to detectors, providing a picture of what is
going on in the brain. This technique does not require bulky
equipment, and unlike EEG it does not measure electrical activity,
so it is not confused by muscle activity. Both Facebook and Open-
water are focusing their eﬀorts on this area. 
The obstacles to a breakthrough are formidable, however. Cur-
rent infrared techniques measure an epiphenomenon, blood oxy-
genation (the degree of which aﬀects the absorption of light), rath-
er than the actual ﬁring of neurons. The light usually penetrates
only a few millimetres into the cortex. And because light scatters
in tissue (think of how your whole ﬁngertip glows red when you
press a pen-torch against it), the precise source of reﬂected signals
is hard to identify. 
Facebook is not saying much about what it is doing. Its eﬀorts
are being led by Mark Chevillet, who joined the social-media
giant’s Building 8 consumer-hardware team from Johns Hopkins
University. To cope with the problem of light scattering as it passes
through the brain, the team hopes to be able to pick up on both
ballistic photons, which pass through tissue in a straight line, and
what it terms “quasi-ballistic photons”, which deviate slightly but
can still be traced to a speciﬁc source. The clock is ticking. Dr Che-
villet has about a year of a two-year programme left to demon-
strate that the ﬁrm’s goal of brain-controlled typing at 100 words a
minute is achievable using current invasive cell-recording tech-
niques, and to produce a road map for replicating that level of per-
formance non-invasively. 
Openwater is much less tight-lipped. Ms Jepsen says that her
San Francisco-based startup uses holography to reconstruct how
light scatters in the body, so it can neutralise this eﬀect. Openwater,
she suggests, has already created technology that has a billion
times the resolution of an fMRI machine, can penetrate the cortex
to a depth of 10cm, and can sample data in milliseconds. 
Openwater has yet to demonstrate its technology, so these
claims are impossible to verify. Most BCI experts are sceptical. But
Ms Jepsen has an impressive background in consumer electronics
and display technologies, and breakthroughs by their nature up-
end conventional wisdom. Developer kits are due out in 2018. 
In the meantime, other eﬀorts to decipher the language of the
brain are under way. Some involve heading downstream into the
peripheral nervous system. One example of that approach is
CTRL-Labs; another is provided by Qi Wang, at Columbia Univer-
sity, who researches the role of the locus coeruleus, a nucleus deep
in the brain stem that plays a role in modulating anxiety and
stress. Dr Wang is looking at ways of stimulating the vagus nerve,
which runs from the brain into the abdomen, through the skin to
see if he can aﬀect the locus coeruleus.

1

6

The Economist Januar y 6th 2018

2

Others are looking at invasive approaches that do not involve
drilling through the skull. One idea, from a ﬁrm called SmartStent,
using technology partly developed with the University of Mel-
bourne, is to use a stent-like device called a “stentrode” that is stud-
ded with electrodes. It is inserted via a small incision in the neck
and then guided up through blood vessels to overlie the brain.
Once the device is in the right location, it expands from about the
size of a matchstick to the size of the vessel and tissue grows into its
scaﬀolding, keeping it in place. Human trials of the stentrode are
due to start next year.
Another approach is to put electrodes under the scalp but not
under the skull. Maxime Baud, a neurologist attached to the Wyss
Centre, wants to do just that in order to monitor the long-term sei-
zure patterns of epileptics. He hopes that once these patterns are
revealed, they can be used to provide accurate forecasts of when a
seizure is likely to occur.
Yet others think they need to go directly to the source of action
potentials. And that means heading inside the brain itself. 7

Implants

Inside intelligence

The hunt for smaller, safer and smarter brain implants 

T ALK to neuroscientists about brain-computer interfaces
(BCIs) for long enough, and the stadium analogy is al-
most bound to come up. This compares the neural activi-
ty of the brain to the noise made by a crowd at a football
game. From outside the ground, you might hear back-
ground noise and be able to tell from the roars whether a
team has scored. In a blimp above the stadium you can tell who
has scored and perhaps which players were involved. Only inside
it can you ask the fan in row 72 how things unfolded in detail. 
Similarly, with the brain it is only by getting closer to the action
that you can really understand what is going on. To get high-reso-
lution signals, for now there is no alternative to opening up
the skull. One option is to place electrodes onto the sur-
face of the brain in what is known as electrocorticogra-
phy. Another is to push them right into the tissue of the
brain, for example by using a grid of microelectrodes
like BrainGate’s Utah array.
Just how close you have to come to indi-
vidual neurons to operate BCIs is a matter

TECHNOLOGY QUARTERLY Brain-computer inter faces

of debate. In people who suﬀer from movement disorders such as
Parkinson’s disease, spaghetti-like leads and big electrodes are
used to carry out deep-brain stimulation over a fairly large area of
tissue. Such treatment is generally regarded as eﬀective. Andrew
Jackson of the University of Newcastle thinks that recording activ-
ity by ensembles of neurons, of the sort that gets picked up by elec-
trocorticography arrays, can be used to decode relatively simple
movement signals, like an intention to grasp something or to ex-
tend the elbow. 
But to generate ﬁne-grained control signals, such as the move-
ment of individual ﬁngers, more precision is needed. “These are
very small signals, and there are many neurons packed closely to-
gether, all ﬁring together,” says Andrew Schwartz of the University
of Pittsburgh. Aggregating them inevitably means sacriﬁcing de-
tail. After all, individual cells can have very speciﬁc functions,
from navigation to facial recognition. The 2014 Nobel prize for
medicine was awarded for work on place and grid cells, which ﬁre
when animals reach a speciﬁc location; the idea of the “Jennifer
Aniston neuron” stems from research showing that single neu-
rons can ﬁre in response to pictures of a speciﬁc celebrity. 
Companies like Neuralink and Kernel are betting that the most
ambitious visions of BCIs, in which thoughts, images and move-
ments are seamlessly encoded and decoded, will require high-res-
olution implants. So, too, is America’s Defense Advanced Re-
search Projects Agency (DARPA), an arm of the Pentagon, which
this year distributed $65m among six organisations to create a
high-resolution implantable interface. BrainGate and others con-
tinue to work on systems of their own. 
But the challenges that these researchers face are truly daunt-
ing. The ideal implant would be safe, small, wireless and long-last-
ing. It would be capable of transmitting huge amounts of data at
high speed. It would interact with many more neurons than cur-
rent technology allows (the DARPA programme sets its grant recip-
ients a target of 1m neurons, along with a deadline of 2021 for a pi-
lot trial to get under way in humans). It would also have to
navigate an environment that Claude Clément of the Wyss Centre
likens to a jungle by the sea: humid, hot and salty. “The brain is not
the right place to do technology,” he says. As the chief technology
oﬃcer, he should know. 

Da neuron, ron, ron
That is not stopping people from trying. The eﬀorts now being
made to create better implants can be divided into two broad cate-
gories. The ﬁrst reimagines the current technology of small wire
electrodes. The second heads oﬀ in new, non-electrical directions. 
Start with ways to make electrodes smaller and better. Ken
Shepard is a professor of electrical and biomedical engineering at
Columbia University; his lab is a recipient of DARPA funds, and is
aiming to build a device that could eventually help
blind people with an intact visual cortex to see by
stimulating precisely the right neu-

The Economist Januar y 6th 2018

7

2

TECHNOLOGY QUARTERLY Brain-computer inter faces

rons in order to produce images inside their brains. He thinks he
can do so by using state-of-the-art CMOS (complementary metal-
oxide semiconductor) electronics. 
Dr Shepard is aware that any kind of penetrating electrode can
cause cell damage, so he wants to build “the mother of all surface
recording devices” which will sit on top of the cortex and under
the membranes that surround the brain. He has already created a
prototype of a ﬁrst-generation CMOS chip, which measures about
1cm by 1cm and contains 65,000 electrodes; a slightly larger, sec-
ond-generation version will house 1m sensors. But like everyone
else trying to make implants work, Dr Shepard is not just cram-
ming sensors onto the chip. He also has to add the same number
of ampliﬁers, a converter to turn the analogue signals of action po-
tentials into the digital 0s and 1s of machine learning, and a wire-
less link to send (or receive) data to a relay station that will sit on
the scalp. That, in turn, will send (or receive) the data wirelessly to
external processors for decoding. 
The device also has to be powered, another huge part of the
implantables puzzle. No one in the ﬁeld puts faith in batteries as a
source of power. They are too bulky, and the risk of battery ﬂuid
leaking into the brain is too high. Like many of his peers, Dr Shep-
ard uses inductive coupling, whereby currents passing through a
coiled wire create a magnetic ﬁeld that can induce a current in a
second coil (the way that an electric toothbrush gets recharged).
That job is done by coils on the chip and on the relay station. 
Over on America’s west coast, a startup called Paradromics is
also using inductive coupling to power its
implantable. But Matt Angle, its boss, does
not think that souped-up surface record-
ings will deliver suﬃciently high resolu-
tion. Instead, he is working on creating tiny
bundles of glass and metal microwires that
can be pushed into brain tissue, a bit like a
Utah array but with many more sensors. To
stop the wires clumping together, thereby
reducing the number of neurons they en-
gage with, the ﬁrm uses a sacriﬁcial po-
lymer to splay them apart; the polymer dis-
solves but the wires remain separated.
They are then bonded onto a high-speed
CMOS circuit. A version of the device, with
65,000 electrodes, will be released next
year for use in animal research. 
That still leaves lots to do before Para-
dromics can meet its DARPA-funded goal
of creating a 1m wire device that can be
used in people. Chief among them is cop-
ing with the amount of data coming out of
the head. Dr Angle reckons that the initial
device produces 24 gigabits of data every
second (streaming an ultra-high-deﬁnition
movie on Netﬂix uses up to 7GB an hour).
In animals, these data can be transmitted
through a cable to a bulky aluminium
head-mounted processor. That is a hard
look to pull oﬀ in humans; besides, such
quantities of data would generate far too
much heat to be handled inside the skull or
transmitted wirelessly out of it. 
So Paradromics, along with everyone
else trying to create a high-bandwidth sig-
nal into and out of the brain, has to ﬁnd a
way to compress the data rate without
compromising the speed and quality of in-
formation sent. Dr Angle reckons he can do
this in two ways: ﬁrst, by ignoring the mo-
ments of silence in between action poten-
tials, rather than laboriously encoding

8

them as a string of zeros; and second, by concentrating on the
wave forms of speciﬁc action potentials rather than recording
each point along their curves. Indeed, he sees data compression as
being the company’s big selling-point, and expects others that
want to create speciﬁc BCI applications or prostheses simply to
plug into its feed. “We see ourselves as the neural data backbone,
like a Qualcomm or Intel,” he says. 

Meshy business
Some researchers are trying to get away from the idea of wire im-
plants altogether. At Brown University, for example, Arto Nur-
mikko is leading a multidisciplinary team to create “neurograins”,
each the size of a grain of sugar, that could be sprinkled on top of
the cortex or implanted within it. Each grain would have to have
built-in ampliﬁers, analogue-to-digital converters and the ability
to send data to a relay station which could power the grains induc-
tively and pass the information to an external processor. Dr Nur-
mikko is testing elements of the system in rodents; he hopes even-
tually to put tens of thousands of grains inside the head. 
Meanwhile, in a lab at Harvard University, Guosong Hong is
demonstrating another innovative interface. He dips a syringe
into a beaker of water and injects into it a small, billowing and
glinting mesh. It is strangely beautiful to watch. Dr Hong is a post-
doctoral fellow in the lab of Charles Lieber, a professor of chemis-
try; they are both working to create a neural interface that blurs the
distinction between biology and electronics. Their solution is a
porous net made of a ﬂexible polymer
called SU-8, studded with sensors and con-
ductive metal. 
The mesh is designed to solve a number
of problems. One has to do with the brain’s
immune response to foreign bodies. By
replicating the ﬂexibility and softness of
neural tissue, and allowing neurons and
other types of cells to grow within it, it
should avoid the scarring that stiﬀer, solid
probes can sometimes cause. It also takes
up much less space: less than 1% of the vol-
ume of a Utah array. Animal trials have
gone well; the next stage will be to insert
the mesh into the brains of epilepsy pa-
tients who have not responded to other
forms of treatment and are waiting to have
bits of tissue removed. 
A mile away, at MIT, members of Polina
Anikeeva’s lab are also trying to build de-
vices that match the physical properties of
neural tissue. Dr Anikeeva is a materials
scientist who ﬁrst dived into neuroscience
at the lab of Karl Deisseroth at Stanford
University, who pioneered the use of opto-
genetics, a way of genetically engineering
cells so that they turn on and oﬀ in re-
sponse to light. Her reaction upon seeing a
(mouse) brain up close for the ﬁrst time
was amazement at how squishy it was. “It
is problematic to have something with the
elastic properties of a knife inside some-
thing with the elastic properties of a choco-
late pudding,” she says. 
One way she is dealing with that is to
borrow from the world of telecoms by cre-
ating a multichannel ﬁbre with a width of
100 microns (one micron is a millionth of a
metre), about the same as a human hair.
That is denser than some of the devices be-
ing worked on elsewhere, but the main
thing that distinguishes it is that it can do 

1

The Economist Januar y 6th 2018

2

Introducing
tiny, ﬂexible
mater ials
into the
brain
creates a
“wet
noodle”
problem

multiple things. “Electronics with just cur-
rent and voltage is not going to do the
trick,” she says, pointing out that the brain
communicates not
just electrically but
chemically, too. 
Dr Anikeeva’s sensor has one channel
for recording using electrodes, but it is also
able to take advantage of optogenetics. A
second channel is designed to deliver
channelrhodopsin, an algal protein that
can be smuggled into neurons to make
them sensitive to light, and a third to shine
a light so that these modiﬁed neurons can
be activated. 
It is too early to know if optogenetics
can be used safely in humans: channelrho-
dopsin has to be incorporated into cells us-
ing a virus, and there are question-marks
about how much light can safely be shone
into the brain. But human clinical trials are
under way to make retinal ganglion cells
light-sensitive in people whose photo-
receptor cells are damaged; another of the
recipients of DARPA funds, Fondation Voir
et Entendre in Paris, aims to use the tech-
nique to transfer images from special gog-
gles directly into the visual cortex of com-
pletely blind people. In principle, other
senses could also be restored: optogenetic
stimulation of cells in the inner ear of mice has been used to con-
trol hearing. 
Dr Anikeeva is also toying with another way of stimulating the
brain. She thinks that a weak magnetic ﬁeld could be used to pene-
trate deep into neural tissue and heat up magnetic nanoparticles
that have been injected into the brain. If heat-sensitive capsaicin
receptors were triggered in modiﬁed neurons nearby, the in-
creased temperature would cause the neurons to ﬁre. 
Another candidate for recording and activating neurons, be-
yond voltage, light and magnets, is ultrasound. Jose Carmena and
Michel Maharbiz at the University of California, Berkeley, are the
main proponents of this approach, which again involves the inser-
tion of tiny particles (which they call “neural dust”) into tissue.
Passing ultrasound through the body aﬀects a crystal in these
motes which vibrates like a tuning fork; that produces voltage to
power a transistor. Electrical activity in adjacent tissue, whether
muscles or neurons, can change the nature of the ultrasonic echo
given oﬀ by the particle, so this activity can be recorded. 
Many of these new eﬀorts raise even more questions. If the
ambition is to create a “whole-brain interface” that covers multi-
ple regions of the brain, there must be a physical limit to how
much additional material, be it wires, grains or motes, can be in-
troduced into a human brain. If such particles can be made suﬃ-
ciently small to mitigate that problem, another uncertainty arises:
would they ﬂoat around in the brain, and with what eﬀects? And
how can large numbers of implants be put into diﬀerent parts of
the brain in a single procedure, particularly if the use of tiny, ﬂex-
ible materials creates a “wet noodle” problem whereby implants
are too ﬂoppy to make their way into tissue? (Rumour has it that
Neuralink may be pursuing the idea of an automated “sewing
machine” designed to get around this issue.)
All this underlines how hard it will be to engineer a new neural
interface that works both safely and well. But the range of eﬀorts
to create such a device also prompts optimism. “We are approach-
ing an inﬂection-point that will enable at-scale recording and
stimulation,” says Andreas Schaefer, a neuroscientist at the Crick
Institute in London. 
Even so, being able to get the data out of the brain, or into it, is
only the ﬁrst step. The next thing is processing them. 7

TECHNOLOGY QUARTERLY Brain-computer inter faces

Data processing

Translation required

Once data have been extracted from the brain, how can
they be used to best eﬀect? 

FOR those who reckon that brain-computer interfaces will
never catch on, there is a simple answer: they already have.
Well over 300,000 people worldwide have had cochlear
implants ﬁtted in their ears. Strictly speaking, this hearing
device does not interact directly with neural tissue, but the
eﬀect is not dissimilar. A processor captures sound, which
is converted into electrical signals and sent to an electrode in the
inner ear, stimulating the cochlear nerve so that sound is heard in
the brain. Michael Merzenich, a neuroscientist who helped devel-
op them, explains that the implants provide only a crude repre-
sentation of speech, “like playing Chopin with your ﬁst”. But giv-
en a little time, the brain works out the signals. 
That oﬀers a clue to another part of the BCI equation: what to
do once you have gained access to the brain. As cochlear implants
show, one option is to let the world’s most powerful learning
machine do its stuﬀ. In a famous mid-20th-century experiment,
two Austrian researchers showed that the brain could quickly
adapt to a pair of glasses that turned the image they projected onto
the retina upside down. More recently, researchers at Colorado
State University have come up with a device that converts sounds
into electrical impulses. When pressed against the tongue, it pro-
duces diﬀerent kinds of tingle which the brain learns to associate
with speciﬁc sounds.
The brain, then, is remarkably good at working things out.
Then again, so are computers. One problem with a hearing aid, for
example, is that it ampliﬁes every sound that is coming in; when
you want to focus on one person in a noisy environment, such as a
party, that is not much help. Nima Mesgarani of Columbia Univer-
sity is working on a way to separate out the speciﬁc person you
want to listen to. The idea is that an algorithm will distinguish be-
tween diﬀerent voices talking at the same time, creating a spectro-
gram, or visual representation of sound frequencies, of each per-
son’s speech. It then looks at neural activity in the brain as the
wearer of the hearing aid concentrates on a speciﬁc interlocutor.
This activity can also be reconstructed into a spectrogram, and the
ones that match up will get ampliﬁed (see diagram). 
Algorithms have done better than brain plasticity at enabling
paralysed people to send a cursor to a target using thought alone.
In research published earlier this year, for example, Dr Shenoy and

1

The cocktail-party problem

How to amplify one voice among many

Algorithm
separates
voices

Each voice is compared 
with the listener’s neural 
signals. The closest match 
is the one that is amplified

Source: Nima Mesgarani, Columbia University

The Economist Januar y 6th 2018

9

TECHNOLOGY QUARTERLY Brain-computer inter faces

2

his collaborators at Stanford University recorded a big improve-
ment in brain-controlled typing. This stemmed not from new sig-
nals or whizzier interfaces but from better maths. 
One contribution came from Dr Shenoy’s use of data generat-
ed during the testing phase of his algorithm. In the training phase
a user is repeatedly told to move a cursor to a particular target;
machine-learning programs identify patterns in neural activity
that correlate with this movement. In the testing phase the user is
shown a grid of letters and told to move the cursor wherever he
wants; that tests the algorithm’s ability to predict the user’s wish-
es. The user’s intention to hit a speciﬁc target also shows up in the
data; by reﬁtting the algorithm to include that information too, the
cursor can be made to move to its target more quickly.
But although algorithms are getting better, there is still a lot of
room for improvement, not least because data remain thin on the
ground. Despite claims that smart algorithms can make up for bad
signals, they can do only so much. “Machine learning does nearly
magical things, but it cannot do magic,” says Dr Shenoy. Consider
the use of functional near-infrared spectroscopy to identify sim-
ple yes/no answers given by locked-in patients to true-or-false
statements; they were right 70% of the time, a huge advance on not
being able to communicate at all, but nowhere near enough to
have conﬁdence in their responses to an end-of-life discussion,
say. More and cleaner data are required to build better algorithms. 
It does not help that knowledge of how the brain works is still
so incomplete. Even with better interfaces, the organ’s extraordi-
nary complexities will not be quickly unravelled. The movement
of a cursor has two degrees of freedom, for example; a human

Brain scan

Eberhard Fetz

hand has 27. Visual-cortex researchers often work with static im-
ages, whereas humans in real life have to cope with continuously
moving images. Work on the sensory feedback that humans expe-
rience when they grip an object has barely begun. 
And although computational neuroscientists can piggyback
on broader advances in the ﬁeld of machine learning, from facial
recognition to autonomous cars, the noisiness of neural data pre-
sents a particular challenge. A neuron in the motor cortex may ﬁre 

1

The man who helped launch brain-computer inter faces in 1969 has not ﬁnished yet

tional control of a BCI was possible, and
that the brain was capable of learning
how to operate one without any help.
Some 48 years later, Dr Fetz is still at the
University of Washington, still ﬁzzing with
energy and still enthralled by the brain’s
plasticity. He is particularly interested in
the possibility of artiﬁcially strengthening
connections between cells, and perhaps

BCIs have deep roots. In the 18th century
Luigi Galvani discovered the role of elec-
tricity in nerve activity when he found
that applying voltage could cause a dead
frog’s legs to twitch. In the 1920s Hans
Berger used electroencephalography to
record human brain waves. In the 1960s
José Delgado theatrically used a brain
implant to stop a charging bull in its
tracks. One of the ﬁeld’s father ﬁgures is
still hard at work in the lab. 
Eberhard Fetz was a post-doctoral
researcher at the University of Washing-
ton in Seattle when he decided to test
whether a monkey could control the
needle of a meter using only its mind. A
paper based on that research, published
in 1969, showed that it could. Dr Fetz
tracked down the movement of the need-
le to the ﬁring rate of a single neuron in
the monkey’s brain. The animal learned
to control the activity of that single cell
within two minutes, and was also able to
switch to control a diﬀerent neuron. 
Dr Fetz disclaims any great insights in
setting up the experiment. “I was just
curious, and did not make the association
with potential uses of robotic arms or the
like,” he says. But the eﬀect of his paper
was profound. It showed both that voli-

forging entirely new ones. 
As an example, he points to research
in which the recording of an action poten-
tial in the brain prompts not only the
normal ﬁring of a motor neuron in the
spinal cord but also a parallel stimulus
from a BCI delivered to the same site. The
idea is to take advantage of a relationship
made famous in an aphorism by a Cana-
dian psychologist, Donald Hebb: “Neu-
rons that ﬁre together, wire together.” This
reinforced stimulus strengthens the con-
nection between the original action
potential and the motor neuron, which
could help recovery from spinal-cord
injuries. Such stimulation might also
encourage stronger bonds in the brain
itself—between the speech-processing
area of a stroke victim’s brain, say, and the
region that controls movements of the
lips and mouth.
Asked to explain the slow rate of
progress since his breakthrough paper, Dr
Fetz points to the technical diﬃculties of
recording from single cells and the high
hurdle to doing this sort of work in peo-
ple. But he does not think there is a need
to ﬁnd out much more about the brain in
order to make further advances: “I have
had a lot of progress by just jumping in.” 

10

The Economist Januar y 6th 2018

2 at a rate of 100 action potentials a second when someone thinks
about moving his right arm on one occasion, but at a rate of 115 on
another. To make matters worse, neurons’ jobs overlap. So if a
neuron has an average ﬁring rate of 100 to the right and 70 to the
left, what does a rate of 85 signify?
At least the activities of the motor cortex have a visible output
in the form of movement, showing up correlations with neural
data from which predictions can be made. But other cognitive pro-
cesses lack obvious outputs. Take the area that Facebook is inter-
ested in: silent, or imagined, speech. It is not certain that the brain’s
representation of imagined speech is similar enough to actual
(spoken or heard) speech to be used as a reference point. Progress
is hampered by another factor: “We have a century’s worth of data
on how movement is generated by neural activity,” says Brain-
Gate’s Dr Hochberg dryly. “We know less about animal speech.” 
Higher-level functions, such as decision-making, present an
even greater challenge. BCI algorithms require a model that explic-
itly deﬁnes the relationship between neural activity and the pa-
rameter in question. “The problem begins with deﬁning the pa-
rameter itself,” says Dr Schwartz of Pittsburgh University. “Exactly
what is cognition? How do you write an equation for it?” 
Such diﬃculties suggest two things. One is that a set of algo-
rithms for whole-brain activity is a very long way oﬀ. Another is
that the best route forward for signal processing in a brain-com-
puter interface is likely to be some combination of machine learn-
ing and brain plasticity. The trick will be to develop a system in
which the two co-operate, not just for the sake of eﬃciency but
also for reasons of ethics. 7

Looking for serendipity

Grey matter, red tape

How obstacles to workable brain-computer inter faces may
be overcome

N EUROTECHNOLOGY has long been a favourite of sci-
ence-ﬁction writers. In “Neuromancer”, a wildly inven-
tive book by William Gibson written in 1984, people can
use neural implants to jack into the sensory experi-
ences of others. The idea of a neural lace, a mesh that
grows into the brain, was conceived by Iain M. Banks in
his “Culture” series of novels. “The Terminal Man” by Michael
Crichton, published in 1972, imagines the eﬀects of a brain implant
on someone who is convinced that machines are taking over from
humans. (Spoiler: not good.) 
Where the sci-ﬁ genre led, philosophers are now starting to fol-
low. In Howard Chizeck’s lab at the University of Washington, re-
searchers are working on an implanted device to administer deep-
brain stimulation (DBS) in order to treat a common movement dis-
order called essential tremor. Conventionally, DBS stimulation is
always on, wasting energy and depriving the patient of a sense of
control. The lab’s ethicist, Tim Brown, a doctoral student of philos-
ophy, says that some DBS patients suﬀer a sense of alienation and
complain of feeling like a robot.
To change that, the team at the University of Washington is us-
ing neuronal activity associated with intentional movements as a
trigger for turning the device on. But the researchers also want to
enable patients to use a conscious thought process to override
these settings. That is more useful than it might sound: stimulation
currents for essential tremor can cause side-eﬀects like distorted
speech, so someone about to give a presentation, say, might wish 

The Economist Januar y 6th 2018

TECHNOLOGY QUARTERLY Brain-computer inter faces

to shake rather than slur his words. 
Giving humans more options of this sort will be essential if
some of the bolder visions for brain-computer interfaces are to be
realised. Hannah Maslen from the University of Oxford is another
ethicist who works on a BCI project, in this case a neural speech
prosthesis being developed by a consortium of European re-
searchers. One of her jobs is to think through the distinctions be-
tween inner speech and public speech: people need a dependable
mechanism for separating out what they want to say from what
they think. 
That is only one of many ethical questions that the sci-ﬁ ver-
sions of brain-computer interfaces bring up. What protection will
BCIs oﬀer against neural hacking? Who owns neural data, includ-
ing information that is gathered for research purposes now but
may be decipherable in detail at some point in the future? Where
does accountability lie if a user does something wrong? And if
brain implants are performed not for therapeutic purposes but to
augment people’s abilities, will that make the world an even more
unequal place? 

From potential to action
For some, these sorts of questions cannot be asked too early: more
than any other new technology, BCIs may redeﬁne what it means
to be human. For others, they are premature. “The societal-justice
problem of who gets access to enhanced memory or vision is a
question for the next decades, not years,” says Thomas Cochrane,
a neurologist and director of neuroethics at the Centre for Bioeth-
ics at Harvard Medical School. 
In truth, both arguments are right. It is hard to ﬁnd anyone who
argues that visions of whole-brain implants and AI-human sym-
biosis are impossible to realise; but harder still to ﬁnd anyone who
thinks something so revolutionary will happen in the near future.
This report has looked at some of the technological diﬃculties as-
sociated with taking BCIs out of the lab and into the mainstream.
But these are not the only obstacles in the way of “brain mouses”
and telekinesis. 
The development path to the eventual, otherworldly destina-
tion envisaged by organisations like Neuralink and Kernel is ex-
tremely long and uncertain. The money and patience of rich indi-
viduals like Elon Musk and Bryan Johnson can help, but in reality
each leg of the journey needs a commercial pathway. 
Companies such as CTRL-Labs and Neurable may well open
the door to consumer applications fairly quickly. But for invasive
technologies, commercialisation will ini-
tially depend on therapeutic applications.
That means overcoming a host of hurdles,
from managing clinical trials to changing
doctors’ attitudes. Frank Fischer, the boss
of NeuroPace, has successfully negotiated
regulatory approval for his company’s epi-
lepsy treatment, but it has been a long,
hard road. “If we tried to raise money to-
day knowing the results ahead of time, it
would have been impossible to get fund-
ed,” he says. 
Start with regulation. Neural interfaces
are not drugs but medical devices, which
means that clinical trials can be completed
with just a handful of patients for proof-of-
principle trials, and just a couple of hun-
dred for the trials that come after that. Even
so, ensuring a supply of patients for experi-
ments with invasive interfaces presents
practical diﬃculties. There is only one
good supply of these human guinea pigs:
epilepsy patients who have proved unre-
sponsive to drugs and need surgery. These
patients have already had craniotomies 

Brain-
computer
inter faces
may redeﬁne
what it
means to be
human

1

11

TECHNOLOGY QUARTERLY Brain-computer inter faces

gery. The precedents of once-rare, now-routine procedures such as
laser eye and cosmetic surgery suggest that invasiveness alone
need not stop brain implants from catching on. More than 150,000
people have had electrodes implanted for deep-brain stimulation
to help them control Parkinson’s disease. But it is also a matter of
functionality: plenty of amputees, for example, prefer simple met-
al hooks to prosthetic arms because they are more reliable. 

Waiting for Neuromancer
These are all good reasons to be cautious about the prospects for
BCIs. But there are also reasons to think that the ﬁeld is poised for a
great leap forward. Ed Boyden, a neuroscientist at MIT who made
his name as one of the people behind optogenetics, points out that
innovations are often serendipitous—from Alexander Fleming’s
chance discovery of penicillin to the role of yogurt-makers in the
development of CRISPR, a gene-editing technique. The trick, he
says, is to engineer the chances that serendipity will occur, which
means pursuing lots of paths at once.
That is exactly what is now being done with BCIs. Scientiﬁc ef-
forts to understand and map the brain are shedding ever more
light on how its activity can be harnessed by a BCI and providing
ever more data for algorithms to learn from. Firms like CTRL-Labs
and Neurable are already listening to some of the more accessible
neural signals, be it from the peripheral nervous system or from
outside the skull. NeuroPace’s closed-loop epilepsy system creates
a regulatory precedent that others can follow. 
Above all, researchers are working hard on a wide range of
new implants for sending and receiving signals to and from the
brain. That is where outﬁts like Kernel and Neuralink are focused
in the short term. Mr Musk’s four-year schedule for creating a BCI
for clinical use is too ambitious for full clinical trials to be conclud-
ed, but it is much more realistic for pilot trials. This is also the rough
timeframe to which DARPA is working with its implantables pro-
gramme. With these and other eﬀorts running concurrently, ser-
endipity has become more likely.
Once a really good, portable, patient-friendly BCI is available, it
is not hard to think of medical conditions that aﬀect a large num-
ber of people and could potentially justify surgery. More than 50m
people worldwide suﬀer from epilepsy, and 40% of those do not
respond to medication. Depression aﬀects more than 300m peo-
ple worldwide; many of them might beneﬁt from a BCI that mon-
itored the brain for biomarkers of
such mental disorders and deliv-
ered appropriate stimulation. The
quality of life of many older peo-
ple suﬀering from dysphagia (dif-
ﬁculty in swallowing) could be
improved by a device that helped
them swallow whenever they
wanted to. “A closed-loop system
for recording from a brain and re-
sponding in a medically useful
way is not a small market,” says
Dr Hochberg.
That may still bring to mind
the aphorism of Peter Thiel, a Sil-
icon Valley grandee, about hav-
ing been promised ﬂying cars and
getting 140 characters. There is a
large gap between dreamy talk of
symbiosis with AI, or infrared
eyesight, and taking years to build
a better brain implant for medical
purposes. But if a device to deliv-
er a real-time, high-resolution,
long-lasting picture of neural ac-
tivity can be engineered, that gap
will shrink spectacularly. 7

Customisation options on 
corporate orders of 100 or more
are available. Please contact us 
to discuss your requirements.
For more information on how to
order special repor ts, repr ints or 
any quer ies you may have please
contact:

The Rights and Syndication 
Depar tment
The Economist
20 Cabot Square
London E14 4QW

Tel +44 (0)20 7576 8148
Fax +44 (0)20 7576 8492
e-mail: r ights@economist.com
www.economist.com/r ights

OFFER TO READERS

Repr ints of Technology 
Quar terly are available from 
the Rights and Syndication 
Depar tment. A minimum order
of ﬁve copies is required.

CORPORATE OFFER

The Economist Januar y 6th 2018

2

and electrodes implanted so that doctors can monitor them and
pinpoint the focal points of their seizures; while these patients are
in hospital waiting for seizures to happen, researchers swoop in
with requests of their own. But the supply of volunteers is limited.
Where exactly the electrodes are placed depends on clinical
needs, not researchers’ wishes. And because patients are often de-
liberately sleep-deprived in order to hasten seizures, their capaci-
ty to carry out anything but simple cognitive tasks is limited. 
When it comes to safety, new technologies entail lengthier ap-
proval processes. Harvard’s Dr Lieber says that his neural mesh re-
quires a new sterilisation protocol to be agreed with America’s
Food and Drug Administration. Researchers have to deal with the
question of how well devices will last in the brain over very long
periods. The Wyss Centre has an accelerated-ageing facility that
exposes electrodes to hydrogen peroxide, in a process that mimics
the brain’s immune response to foreign objects; seven days’ expo-
sure in the lab is equivalent to seven years in the brain.
The regulators are not the only people who have to be won
over. Health insurers (or other gatekeepers in single-payer sys-
tems) need to be persuaded that the devices oﬀer value for money.
The Wyss Centre, which aims to bow out of projects before de-
vices are certiﬁed for manufacturing, plans with this in mind. One
of the applications it is working on is for tinnitus, a persistent inter-
nal noise in the ears of suﬀerers which is often caused by overac-
tivity in the auditory cortex. The idea is to provide an implant
which gives users feedback on their cortical activity so that they
can learn to suppress any excess. Looking ahead to negotiations
with insurers, the Wyss is trying to demonstrate the eﬀectiveness
of its implant by including a control group of people whose tinni-
tus is being treated with cognitive behavioural therapy. 
That still leaves two other groups to persuade. Doctors need to
be convinced that the risks of opening up the skull are justiﬁed. Mr
Fischer says that educating physicians proved harder than expect-
ed. “The neurology community does not ﬁnd it natural to think
about device therapy,” he says. 
Most important, patients will have to want the devices. This is
partly a question of whether they are prepared to have brain sur-

12

Europe

Italy

Their generation

F L O R E N C E

The Italian exception

As Italy prepares to vote, young people are fed up with the traditional parties
FOR the ﬁrst time in its brief history, Ita-
than Ms Fatichenti (the better known
ly’s maverick Five Star Movement (M5S)
Beppe Grillo, M5S’s founder, is ineligible to
is going into a general election campaign as
run for parliament due to a conviction for
the front-runner. On December 28th Presi-
manslaughter, in a car accident).
dent Sergio Mattarella dissolved parlia-
Nando Pagnoncelli of Ipsos, a pollster,
ment, clearing the way for a vote on March
says 25- to 34-year-olds are the group most
4th. The latest polls give the M5S, which ad-
likely to support M5S: four points above
vocates direct, internet-based democracy
the average. Young voters are also more
and a hotch-potch of left- and right-wing
likely than their elders to back other radical
policies, a lead of more than three points
parties such as the Brothers of Italy (FdI),
over the centre-left Democratic Party (PD),
the dominant partner in Paolo Gentiloni’s
coalition government. The inexperienced
M5S, founded less than nine years ago,
could thus get ﬁrst crack at forming a gov-
ernment—a prospect that troubles markets
already worried by Italy’s huge public debt
(132% of GDP at the end of 2016).
Like other populist groups in Europe,
the M5S thrives on frustrated expectations.
In Italy disillusion is most intense among
the young and educated. Two-and-a half
years after graduating, Valentina Fatichenti
works six months in every 12 helping stu-
dents at an American university campus in
her native Florence. Otherwise, she
scrapes a precarious living teaching Eng-
lish in primary schools, translating and, oc-
casionally, waitressing.
She has decided to vote for the M5S. Its
appeal? “New faces,” she says. The M5S
chooses its candidates in online polls of its
members. Its candidate for prime minister,
Luigi Di Maio, is 31, just three years older

85+
80-84
75-79
70-74
65-69
60-64
55-59
50-54
45-49
40-44
35-39
30-34
25-29
20-24
15-19
10-14
5-9
0-4

Population by sex and age group, 2016, % of total

FEMALE
2

0

Source: Eurostat

Italy

EU28
MALE

4

2

4

The Economist Januar y 6th 2018 35

Also in this section
36 Catalonia votes for separatists again
37 Russia’s opposition 
37 Obesity in France
38 Turkey’s economy
Charlemagne is on holiday

For daily analysis and debate on Europe, visit
Economist.com/europe

which has neo-fascist roots, and the North-
ern League, which wants less immigration
and more autonomy for northern Italy.
Young Italians resent the older genera-
tions, but not their parents, says Alessan-
dro Rosina, who co-ordinated a recent
study for the Fondazione Bruno Visentini,
a think-tank. They are hostile to main-
stream parties, trade unions and an ill-de-
ﬁned “ruling class”, which they blame for
the vast gap between their incomes, job
prospects and pension pots and those of
their elders. The Intergenerational Founda-
tion’s most recent “intergenerational fair-
ness index” ranks Italy second from bot-
tom in Europe, ahead of only Greece.
In 2014, the last year for which compar-
ative data are available, what the govern-
ment spent on Italy’s past (ie, on pensions)
was more than four times what it spent on
its future (ie, on education and training).
But then, as Mr Pagnoncelli notes, it is the
elderly who have the electoral clout. Voters
over 55 make up 41% of the electorate, com-
pared with 22% under 35—the eﬀect of a
steep decline in the birth rate dating back
to the 1970s (see chart).
Many of the causes of Italy’s generation
gap can be found in political choices made
in the past 20 years that have favoured the
old over the young. Italy’s low birth rate,
coupled with disappointing economic
growth, has prodded successive govern-
ments into pension reforms. But the way in
which these have been carried out has
placed on younger, generally lower-earn-
ing, workers the burden of providing not
only for their own pensions, but also for
those of the already retired. Labour re-
forms in 1997 and 2003 made it easier for
bosses to hire new workers on short-term
contracts, but did little to erode the job se-
curity of those already in permanent em-
ployment. And since the latter, along with 

1

36 Europe

2 pensioners, make up the bulk of trade-un-
ion membership, the unions have been
keener to defend the privileges of those
with jobs for life than to campaign for a
more equitable distribution of beneﬁts.
Ms Fatichenti’s family is typical: her fa-
ther toiled in the same factory for 40 years,
her mother was a janitor. Ms Fatichenti has
a university education. Yet her take-home
pay in the six months when she is under
contract is €300 a month less than that of
her boyfriend, who works in a street mar-
ket. “A lot of employers don’t want gradu-
ates because they don’t have any practical
experience,” she says. That points to a
weakness stressed in Mr Rosina’s report: a
lack of connection between education and
the labour market. Italy has the EU’s high-
est proportion of under-35s not in educa-
tion, employment or training: 30.7% in
2016, compared with 12.4% in Germany. 
A big informal economy allows young
workers to arrangiarsi (get by, with odd

jobs). And Italy’s EU membership lets
them search for work in 27 other countries.
An estimated 600,000 Italians live in Brit-
ain; not even the prospect of Brexit has
stemmed the ﬂow. In the 12 months to
mid-2017, whereas the number of Poles en-
tering the British labour market dropped
by 26%, the number of Italians rose by 2%.
A third factor easing the plight of the young
is family support. Italian parents let their
children live with them far longer than oth-
er European parents. In 2016 only a third of
18-35s had left their parental homes, com-
pared with 63% in France. 
Though changes to pension and em-
ployment rules could go some way to-
wards closing Italy’s generation gap, what
is really needed, reckons Mr Rosina, is a
change of outlook, both among teachers,
who should equip young Italians with life
skills, and employers, who need to start
seeing them not as easily disposable cheap
labour, but as sources of innovation. 7

Spain

Local diﬃculties

M A D R I D

Catalonia will have a new separatist government, but what will it do?
AFTER his ﬁnal cabinet meeting of 2017
Mariano Rajoy, Spain’s prime minister,
admitted that it had been “an extraordi-
narily diﬃcult year”. The economy purred
along, unemployment and the deﬁcit are
falling, but there was a shadow, he said: the
“instability generated by politics in Catalo-
nia”. The problem is that the outcome of
last month’s snap election in Spain’s rebel-
lious north-eastern region suggests that
2018 may not be much easier.
The election was called by Mr Rajoy in
October after he assumed extraordinary
constitutional powers to suspend self-gov-
ernment in Catalonia after a unilateral dec-
laration of independence issued by the

separatist regional administration headed
by Carles Puigdemont. That in turn came
after an unconstitutional independence
referendum, which was further marred by
police violence.
The contest took place in bizarre cir-
cumstances, with Mr Puigdemont cam-
paigning by video link from Brussels,
where he had ﬂed to avoid a charge of re-
bellion. With a record turnout of 79%, the
vote proved to be a qualiﬁed triumph for
him and for the pro-independence co-
alition. On the one hand, in a symbolic
blow to their cause, Ciudadanos, a centre-
right anti-separatist party, became the larg-
est political force, but with only 25% of the
vote. On the other hand, the three separat-
ist parties won a combined 47.6% of the
vote, down only marginally since the last
election in 2015. Because the electoral sys-
tem gives a bit of extra weight to rural ar-
eas, the separatists won 70 of the 135 seats
in the Catalan parliament (down from 72,
but still enough for a slender majority).
Mr Puigdemont’s “Together for Catalo-
nia” list narrowly outpolled Esquerra (Re-
publican Left), the party of his jailed for-
mer coalition partner, Oriol Junqueras. Mr
Puigdemont is demanding his restoration
to the Generalitat, the seat of the Catalan
government. Yet that “is not simple”, as
Sergi Sabrià of Esquerra, which also has its
eye on the presidency, said this week.
During the campaign Mr Puigdemont

Still separatist

Spain, parliament of Catalonia

Election results 2017, seats

0

10

20

30

40

70

Total
seats

65

Pro-independence
Together
for Catalonia
Esquerra

Popular Unity
Anti-independence
Ciudadanos

Socialist Par ty
Catalonia
in Common
People’s Par ty

Sources: Parliament of Catalonia; Agencia EFE

The Economist Januar y 6th 2018

said he would return to Catalonia if he
won (although he would almost certainly
face arrest as soon as he arrived). His sup-
porters are now suggesting that he could
govern virtually from Brussels. That is “ab-
surd”, scoﬀed Mr Rajoy. “It’s as if I wanted
to be prime minister of Spain while living
in Lisbon.” 
In all, ﬁve of those elected for the sepa-
ratist parties are in self-imposed exile and
three are in jail. All except Mr Puigdemont
and Mr Junqueras may resign to allow
their replacement and thus preserve the
separatist majority in parliament when it
sits. If not, Ciudadanos will press for the
job of parliamentary Speaker.
The bigger question is what the new
government will do. Catalan business is
desperate for the separatists to renounce
the unilateral road to independence. The
events of October have prompted more
than 3,200 ﬁrms to move their legal domi-
cile out of the region. Although a claim by
Luis de Guindos, Spain’s economy minis-
ter, of a €1bn hit to Catalonia’s economy
may be exaggerated, unemployment has
edged up and retail sales have slowed.
“Conﬁdence has been lost” and the new
government “will have to work very hard
to recover it,” says Jordi Alberich of the Cer-
cle d’Economia, a business group. 
There is palpable weariness in the inde-
pendence movement. Its priority now is
an amnesty for its leaders, though there is
little appetite for that elsewhere in Spain.
“It’s a moment to insist on the third way”
between independence and the status
quo, says Mr Alberich. 
But there is little short-term incentive
for Mr Rajoy do so. His People’s Party was
crushed in the election, outﬂanked by Ciu-
dadanos, which is against any concessions
to Catalan nationalism. The likelihood is
that in 2018 the Catalan case will mutate
from acute to chronic. 7

Rajoy’s pain continues

The Economist Januar y 6th 2018 

Europe 37

Obesity in France

Body positive

P A R I S

sophobie (fat-shaming), including a fash-
ion show with larger models. (France has
previously held several “Miss Ronde”
contests.) The event was partly inspired
by the success of a memoir by a trainee
teacher, Gabrielle Deydier, who de-
scribes daily humiliations she endures as
a fat person in France, such as being
mocked for what she buys at the bakery.
The diﬃculty for oﬃcial campaigns
against grossophobie, however, is that
contradictory messages are louder, glossi-
er and better funded. Despite pledges by
fashion and luxury houses not to use
skeletal-looking models when promoting
their goods, billboards and magazines
remain crammed with skinny ﬁgures.
Activists say this promotes both eating
disorders among the thin and misery
among the plump. 

A campaign against fat-shaming gets under way
FRANCE has only a few plump heroes,
real or imagined. There was King Louis
the Fat, who ruled from 1108 to 1137, pac-
iﬁed unruly barons, centralised power
and won several wars. Gargantua, a giant
created by François Rabelais, drank the
milk of 17,913 cows each day. Gérard De-
pardieu (pictured), France’s best-known
modern actor, is hefty enough to play
Obelix, France’s best-known overweight
cartoon Gaulish warrior, on the screen.
In general, however, the French see
themselves as gourmets, not gourmands.
And indeed they are thinner than people
in most other rich countries: only 15.3% of
them are obese, compared with an OECD
average of 19.5%. Worryingly, though, this
has risen from less than 6% in 1990, while
the share of adults who are overweight
has risen from 30% to over 46%. Growing
appetites for processed food and more
sedentary lives are leading to bigger
waistlines. 
For policymakers, this is a problem.
Obesity leads to sickness—rates of diabe-
tes are rising, for example. The state
estimates that the overweight population
already requires extra health and other
spending of some €20bn a year. Weight
is closely correlated with poverty: a
French study last year suggested that
children of parents classed as “non-
professional” are four times likelier to be
obese than those of professionals. To
discourage overeating, France taxes
sugary drinks, bars junk food in schools
and has rules on nutritional labelling. 
At the same time, oﬃcials want peo-
ple to be kinder to their plus-sized compa-
triots. Anne Hidalgo, the mayor of Paris,
hosted a conference last month on gros-

Nothing to be ashamed of

few times by the detentions of Mr Navalny
himself and of his campaign chief.
But just as Mr Navalny refuses to recog-
nise Mr Putin as an irreplaceable leader, Mr
Putin conspicuously refuses to acknowl-
edge Mr Navalny as a legitimate challeng-
er. He pretends not to notice him and
avoids mentioning him by name. When
Ksenia Sobchak, a liberal-minded TV jour-
nalist and presidential candidate, asked Mr
Putin why Mr Navalny was excluded from
the ballot, Mr Putin said he would not al-
low “the ﬁgures you mentioned” to “desta-
bilise our country”. 
Gleb Pavlovsky, a political analyst and a
former adviser to Mr Putin, says that Mr
Navalny has already seized the political
initiative. Although the Kremlin can keep
him oﬀ the ballot paper, it cannot keep him

away from street politics, unless it decides
to arrest him yet again. Far from neutralis-
ing Mr Navalny as a threat, the ban and the
ensuing boycott may have made him even
more dangerous. For all of Mr Putin’s au-
thoritarianism, he still relies on the con-
sent of the public and of Russia’s various
elites, and derives what legitimacy he has
from popular support. The election is
meant to be a way of demonstrating to the
elite that the public still recognise him as
their only possible leader.
Although Mr Putin’s victory in March is
assured, the success of the election is not.
The purpose of Mr Navalny’s eﬀorts,
which 
include the boycott, agitation
against the election and the monitoring of
its results, is to present the whole proce-
dure as a ﬂop, to minimise the turnout and 

1

Russia

Cardboard
Kremlin

Vladimir Putin bars his main challenger
TWO leading politicians delivered their
new year’s greetings to the Russian
public this week. One was the president,
Vladimir Putin, who has been in power for
18 years and is planning to stay for at least
another six following an election due in
March. The other was Alexei Navalny (pic-
tured), the only truly independent opposi-
tion leader. He is also the person who
poses the biggest challenge to Mr Putin,
and has consequently been barred from
standing. Both men were speaking using
the Kremlin as a backdrop; but in Mr Na-
valny’s case, it was drawn on a board.
The latter image carried a message: the
upcoming election, in which only candi-
dates approved by the Kremlin will be al-
lowed to run, is a cartoon; and genuine pol-
itics are unfolding outside the castle’s walls
and beyond its control. As part of this pro-
cess Mr Navalny has called for a nation-
wide strike on January 28th to launch a
boycott of the poll. 
Neither Mr Navalny’s ban, announced
on December 25th, nor his call for a boycott
came as much of a surprise. Ever since he
galvanised huge street protests in Moscow
against rigging in the legislative elections
of 2011, the Kremlin has sought to neutral-
ise the threat he poses by engineering
fraud charges against him and slapping
him with a criminal conviction to disquali-
fy him from running for the presidency. Mr
Navalny has successfully appealed to the
European Court of Human Rights, though
the court has no power to enforce its judg-
ment. He has also staged an election cam-
paign that has drawn large crowds across
the country, despite being interrupted a

38 Europe

The Economist Januar y 6th 2018

Turkey’s bounce-back

GDP, % change on a year earlier

12

10

8

6

4

2

+

0

–

2

2010 11

12

13

14

15

16

17

Source: Turkish Statistical Institute

which immediately nosedived, before re-
covering slightly. The bank is stuck be-
tween a rock and a hard place, says Murat
Ucer, an economist. “If they do nothing
they risk a market backlash, and if they
move sharply they face a political one,” he
says. Mr Erdogan may pile on even more
pressure to keep rates low ahead of parlia-
mentary and presidential elections in 2019. 
Either way, a slowdown this year looks
inevitable. Turkey’s banks lack the funding
base needed for another mass injection of
credit under the KGF, analysts say. Its com-
panies have borrowed from abroad at a
faster rate than any emerging market save
China’s. Global tightening will make it
harder for them to keep doing so. Oﬃcials
in Ankara predict growth of about 7% for
the whole of 2017, but expect a return to
more modest levels this year. Hatice Kara-
han, a presidential adviser, and one of the
few voices of economic orthodoxy in Mr
Erdogan’s circle, says Turkey needs to kick
its addiction to debt and to invest in sus-
tainable growth. That is easier said than
done. Turkish ministers have been promis-
ing economic reforms for a decade, and
have failed to deliver each time. The econ-
omy was ﬁring on all cylinders in 2017. It is
beginning to run out of gas. 7

2 to expose any attempts to rig it. “The aim of
our strike is to cause maximum political
damage to Putin, his party and his cronies,”
Mr Navalny told his supporters in another
recent broadcast. Backed by 200,000 vol-
unteers across Russia, he hopes to create a
widespread public perception that
the
election is a fraud.
Ms Sobchak, who says she is campaign-
ing “against everyone”, dismisses Mr Na-
valny’s tactics, arguing that the system is
too powerful to be tackled head on and
can only be changed from within—which
is what she says she is trying to achieve. Mr
Navalny’s plans, however, reﬂect his con-
viction that Russia has passed the point
when power can change as a result of an
orderly election. The irony is that by bar-
ring him, Mr Putin has tended to conﬁrm
this analysis. 7

Turkey’s economy

Firing on all
cylinders

I S T A N B U L

But for how long?
THESE have been testing times for Emin
Taha and his Turkish transport com-
pany. The war against the so-called Islamic
State has reduced much of Mosul, Iraq’s
second city and a big market for Turkish
goods, to rubble. Trade with Iraqi Kurdis-
tan ground to a halt when the federal gov-
ernment in Baghdad reacted furiously to
an independence referendum in Septem-
ber. (It deployed troops to the contested
city of Kirkuk, seized the nearby oilﬁelds
and closed Kurdish airspace to internation-
al ﬂights.) Mr Taha, whose company relies
on trade with Iraq for the bulk of its rev-
enues, refused to give up. “We told our cus-
tomers not to worry, to keep selling to Iraq,
and that we would stand by them,” he
says. A 20m lira ($5m) loan backed by Tur-
key’s credit guarantee fund (KGF) helped
the company regain its footing and com-
plete work on a number of projects, includ-
ing new warehouses in Iraq. 
Like Mr Taha’s business, Turkey’s econ-
omy is doing surprisingly well. In the third
quarter of 2017 GDP surged by 11.1% year-
on-year, outperforming all major coun-
tries. This is partly because Turkey did so
badly in the same period in 2016, when the
economy shrank by 0.8% after a failed
coup. But it owes more to a wave of easy
credit that has washed over the country,
helping thousands of companies cope
with the eﬀects of a sharp drop in tourism,
the imposition of emergency law, and a
government crackdown that has cost
60,000 people their freedom. Under the re-
cently expanded KGF, the government has

provided 221bn lira in loans to small and
medium-sized businesses, Mr Taha’s in-
cluded. Tax breaks have helped trigger an
increase in household spending, which
shot up by 11.7% in the year to the third
quarter.
Yet the outlook is not entirely rosy. Tur-
key’s current-account deﬁcit has swelled
from $33.7bn at the end of 2016 to $41.9bn
(4.7% of GDP) now. Foreign direct invest-
ment is roughly half what it was a decade
ago. Stirred by the credit boom, the spectre
of high inﬂation, which haunted Turkey
from the 1970s until the early 2000s, has re-
turned. Prices surged by 13% in the year to
November, the highest rate in 14 years, and
more than double the central bank’s target.
Without ﬁscal and monetary restraint, a
prolonged bout of double-digit inﬂation
may be in store, says William Jackson of
Capital Economics, a London consultancy. 
Years of political turmoil, terror attacks,
rows with allies, and most recently fears of
American ﬁnes against Turkish banks sus-
pected of violating sanctions against Iran,
have also taken their toll on the country’s
currency. The lira has lost about a tenth of
its value against the dollar since the start of
2017 and nearly 40% since early 2015. For
Turkish companies, especially small ones,
saddled with foreign-currency debt worth
a total of $211bn, this is bad news. In early
December the government announced it
would take measures to prevent 23,000 of
the weakest businesses from taking out
more foreign-currency loans. 
Scared stiﬀ by Turkey’s authoritarian
and growth-obsessed president, Recep
Tayyip Erdogan, the country’s central bank
has done little to help, preferring to make
cosmetic adjustments to its byzantine sys-
tem of lending rates, instead of the decisive
increase needed to bring inﬂation under
control. At its last meeting on December
14th, the bank raised its key rate from 12.25%
to 12.75%, much less than markets expected.
Investors reacted by dumping the lira,

On the move

40

Br itain

The Economist Januar y 6th 2018

Also in this section
41 Commuters ditch the railways
42 Bagehot: Drama and dr ift in 2018

The National Health Ser vice

A thinning front line

S P A L D I N G

As hospitals struggle with a winter crisis, a longer-term problem is brewing in
primary care
IN PLOIESTI, just north of Bucharest, Dan-
iela Margaritescu had a grand house, a
big car and her own surgery. But when she
set eyes on the Beechﬁeld Medical Centre
in Spalding, Lincolnshire, it was “love at
ﬁrst sight”. The 46-year-old Romanian was
hired last year as part of a pilot scheme to
recruit more foreign doctors to ﬁll chronic
vacancies in primary care. For Dr Margari-
tescu it is a “perfect” deal. She learns new
skills, her three children attend good
schools and her pay has roughly doubled.
For their part, the people of Lincolnshire—
who voted heavily to leave the European
Union in the referendum of 2016—are hap-
py to have new doctors at last.
As people return spluttering from their
Christmas holidays, the National Health
Service is entering its busiest time of the
year. On January 3rd Jeremy Hunt, the
health secretary, apologised to patients
after non-essential operations were sus-
pended until the end of the month to ease
the pressure on hospitals. Senior doctors
took to Twitter to lament the “third-world”
conditions on wards. But although the
scenes in hospitals, where patients have
been left waiting on trolleys in corridors for
hours, are dramatic, a less-noticed crisis is
under way on the front lines of the NHS.
General practitioners (GPs), patients’ ﬁrst
port of call and the gatekeepers of most
health services, are a dwindling army.
Take Lincolnshire. Before the arrival of
Dr Margaritescu and 24 other doctors from

eastern Europe, 104 of the county’s 434 po-
tential spots for GPs were vacant. The
Beechﬁeld practice ran three recruitment
rounds without ﬁnding a suitable candi-
date. “People drive past [Lincolnshire] on
the way to Scotland, and then again on the
way back to London,” says Kieran Shar-
rock, medical director of the local body
that represents GPs. There is no medical
school in the county, depriving it of a pipe-
line of talent. Doctors balk at joining re-
mote practices with lots of old patients; in
some Lincolnshire surgeries, half the pa-
tients have at least four chronic diseases.
Lincolnshire’s woes are particularly se-
vere, but across the board the NHS is strug-
gling to hire and retain GPs. It recently
changed how it counts them, so decipher-
ing trends is tricky, but the number of GPs
has probably been falling since at least
2009, during which time the number of
hospital consultants has risen by a third. In
2016 Simon Stevens, the chief executive of
NHS England, pledged to recruit 5,000
more GPs over the next ﬁve years. But the
count has fallen further, reaching the
equivalent of 33,302 full-time GPs in Sep-
tember, 1,290 fewer than two years earlier.
The number of surgeries has dropped to
7,674, from 8,451 a decade ago. Some towns
face losing most of theirs; last year seven of
the eight practices in Folkestone, on the
south coast, said they intended to close.
Even before the creation of the NHS in
1948, family doctors played an outsized

For daily analysis and debate on Br itain, visit
Economist.com/br itain

role in providing health care in England.
Their pivotal position was described in the
novels of Anthony Trollope and George El-
iot. Today Mr Stevens calls the GP arguably
the most important job in Britain. They de-
cide when to refer patients for hospital
care, and provide a wider range of services
than their peers in many countries (Polish
doctors in Lincolnshire note that back
home they rarely saw children or dealt
with gynaecological cases). And their role
is set to become even more important: the
government wants more patients with
chronic conditions to be cared for outside
hospital, which will require GPs to co-
ordinate treatment.

What seems to be the problem?
The shortage of GPs partly reﬂects a change
in the workforce. In 2006, 43% of GPs were
women; a decade later the share was 55%. It
is set to rise further, since male GPs are clos-
er to retirement age, on average. Because
only one-ﬁfth of female GPs work full-
time, compared with half of male GPs,
more of them are needed. A recent analysis
by Imperial College London suggests that
an additional 12,000 GPs will be required
by 2020—more than twice the NHS’s target.
Another reason is that the job has be-
come less attractive. GPs complain of hav-
ing to do more work for less pay—and they
have a point. The English population has
grown by 4.3m in the past decade, and pa-
tients are seeking help more often than
they used to. The number of consultations
per patient increased by about 10% be-
tween 2007 and 2014, according to a study
in the Lancet, a medical journal. A survey
of GPs in 11 countries by the Common-
wealth Fund, a think-tank, found that 92%
of British GPs reported typically spending
less than 15 minutes with a patient, com-
pared with 27% of GPs in other countries.
British GPs were also the most likely to say 

1

The Economist Januar y 6th 2018 

2 they were stressed. 
One London-based GP describes a
“light day”: 25-30 scheduled appoint-
ments; ﬁve to ten emergency ones; one or
two home visits; 30-50 replies to be written
to hospital doctors, plus a similar pile of pa-
thology reports to read; and 10-20 repeat
prescriptions to process. Some feel like sec-
retaries, writing referrals for ungrateful pa-
tients. It is a lonely job, without the cama-
raderie of a hospital ward.
Over the past decade GPs’ pay has fall-
en. In 2004 the Labour government agreed
on a contract that raised the average pay of
a partner in an English surgery to £136,665
($185,000) in today’s prices. Since then
partners’ pay has slipped to £104,900, as
successive governments have made the
contract less generous. Salaried GPs earn
an average of £63,000, less than hospital
doctors with similar experience. And, un-
like those clinicians, GPs pay thousands of
pounds a year in indemnity insurance.
In an ordinary labour market, employ-
ers could raise pay to ﬁll vacancies. But the
NHS, the world’s ﬁfth-largest employer
(behind the American and Chinese armed
forces, Walmart and McDonald’s) does not
operate in an ordinary labour market. In ef-
fect, pay is set at a national level. The num-
ber of doctors to be trained in each special-
ism is determined centrally years in
advance. Since it typically takes ten years
to train a GP, failures of planning mean
shortages that take a decade or more to ﬁx.
The government has said it will in-
crease the number of places at medical
schools by 25% from September. (Unlike
other degrees, there is a cap on places to
study medicine, because the course is
heavily subsidised.) But that will take time
to translate into more GPs. It will also re-
quire universities to improve the reputa-
tion of general practice; for a certain type of
thrusting medical student, only dentists
are viewed with more disdain than
would-be GPs.
With no end to the staﬃng problem in
sight, some surgeries are adapting. They
are employing more paramedics, nurses
and pharmacists to see patients. Several
surgeries are becoming mega-practices,
spreading the GPs they have across many
sites. Others will increasingly rely on doc-
tors from overseas. Britain already em-
ploys a higher share of foreign doctors
(27%) than the average across the 28 mem-
bers of the OECD club (17%). Of the 12,771
doctors who registered in Britain in 2016,
44% had qualiﬁed overseas. 
According to research by Aneez Esmail
of the University of Manchester, and col-
leagues, foreign-trained GPs are more like-
ly than British ones to work in poor areas,
earn less money and work longer shifts.
But doctors trained abroad also score low-
er on postgraduate medical exams, and are
more often subject to complaints. In Lin-
colnshire the doctors recognise they have a

Br itain 41

lot to learn. Accordingly, for their ﬁrst two
years they get twice as much time to spend
with patients as other GPs do. 
Those running the pilot believe that it
will continue after Britain leaves the EU,
given the need for GPs. The NHS has said it
wants the programme to be scaled up to at-
tract 2,000 foreign GPs. Tomasz Grela, a ge-
nial new Polish doctor in Spalding, is not
too worried about Brexit. “The medical
system needs us,” he says. And although
he readily concedes that he needs to get up
to speed with the British system, he is
showing signs of acclimatisation. Asked
what frustrates him most about the NHS,
he gives the same response as most British
doctors: “Bureaucracy.” 7

Train travel

Oﬀ the rails

Rising fares and poor service prompt
more commuters to work from home
ALONG with 3m other workers, Ea-
monn, a civil servant, used to com-
mute into London daily. It was once an
easy jaunt of 30 minutes by train from
Coulsdon South to Victoria. But after years
of strikes and driver shortages at Southern
Rail, the operator on that line, getting to
work became a lottery—a train running on
time felt like a “luxury for special occa-
sions only,” he groans. With Southern can-
celling up to 350 trains a day, in one three-
week period last autumn he managed to
get to the oﬃce on only two days. Eventual-
ly he moved to Liverpool to escape his aw-
ful commute.
Many other Londoners are changing
the way they work because of the railways’
poor, pricey service. On January 2nd rail
fares across Britain rose by an average of
3.4%, the largest increase since 2013. Over
the past decade fares have risen twice as
fast as salaries. Falling subsidies mean that

Decoupling

Br itain, rail passenger journeys 

% change on a year earlier

Rest of
Br itain

London and
south-east

2010 11

12

13

14

15

16

17

Source: Of f ice of Rail and Road

12

8

4

+

0

–

4

8

passengers now pick up 70% of the rail net-
work’s costs, up from 50% ten years ago.
Until now, passengers have put up with
it. Since the industry was privatised in the
mid-1990s, the number of rail journeys in
the south-east has soared by 130%, though
fares have risen by 45% in real terms. But
that seems to be changing. The year to
April 2017 saw the ﬁrst big drop in passen-
ger numbers in the south-east outside a re-
cession (see chart).
Many rail executives blame a Brexit-in-
duced slowdown for falling traﬃc. But that
doesn’t explain why the drop-oﬀ has been
highest in the south-east. Indeed, since the
referendum in June 2016, output in London
has grown faster than in any other British
region and employment has risen.
More likely it is high fares and unreli-
able service that are persuading commut-
ers to change how they work, says Stephen
Joseph of the Campaign for Better Tran-
sport, a pressure group. In the six months
to September, journeys made on season
tickets—which save money for daily com-
muters—fell by a tenth, while journeys
made using single-use tickets continued to
rise. The trend is strongest in the south-
east, where fares are highest and services
heavily disrupted. With more part-time
jobs and technology that lets people work
from home, going to the oﬃce every day is
falling out of fashion. Employers, facing
high rents, are keen to encourage this. The
amount of space per employee in the City
of London has fallen from 17 square metres
(183 square feet) in the 1990s to just 11 now.
The fall in passenger numbers creates a
ﬁnancial headache for ministers. Train op-
erating companies can claim compensa-
tion if they undershoot revenue forecasts.
So “one way or another” the government
will take the hit, says Gerald Khoo, a rail
analyst at Liberium, a bank. On December
29th Lord Adonis resigned as chairman of
the National Infrastructure Commission
and called for the transport secretary, Chris
Grayling, to quit for “bailing out” private
rail operators, which he denies.
If the government ends up forking out
more for the everyday running of the rail-
ways, its investment plans may be dented.
Track-electriﬁcation schemes could be fur-
ther scaled back. Transport for London,
which runs the Tube, has shelved upgrades
to the Jubilee and Northern lines, follow-
ing falling ticket sales. 
The government is considering limiting
fare increases more strictly in the future.
That would cut train operators’ revenue
further. Mr Joseph suggests that moving to
a simpler fare structure, with season tickets
for part-time commuters, could lure more
people back onto trains, as such schemes
have elsewhere in Europe. Londoners may
not be willing to wait. As Eamonn notes, in
Liverpool getting to work costs only £15
($20) a week—and even on strike days the
trains get him to work on time. 7

42 Br itain

The Economist Januar y 6th 2018

Bagehot

Drama and drift

Three predictions for British politics in 2018

Commons several times. They may even defeat the government
on matters of detail. But after a display of rhetorical ﬁreworks
they will shy away from constitutional conﬂict. It is impossible
for even the best-run unelected chamber to prevail in a struggle
with an elected one. And, as the Daily Mail will no doubt point
out, the House of Lords is far from well run. It is the second-largest
legislative body in the world, after the Chinese National Con-
gress, with more than 800 members, scores of whom avail them-
selves of the £300 ($400) daily attendance allowance and free
parking in central London without opening their mouths.
Nothing could be more British than the House of Lords. But
the second prediction is the further Americanisation of British
politics. For the past 30 years American politics has been con-
sumed by “culture wars”, as questions of identity have replaced
questions of economics at the heart of the political divide. Do-
nald Trump, a billionaire Republican, did strikingly well among
“deplorable” voters in the Rust Belt, while Hillary Clinton piled
up votes in wealthy New York and California. Brexit is pushing
Britain in the same direction, as the Conservative Party becomes
the party of Leavers, who are concentrated in poor and rural ar-
eas, and Labour becomes the party of Remainers.
The past month has already seen a heated battle in the culture
wars, with the Home Oﬃce’s announcement that it is planning to
restore Britain’s supposedly iconic “blue” passports (Bagehot has
his old passport to hand and has no doubt that it is black). A great
deal more can be expected, with the wars following the same pat-
tern. Leavers will seize on some icon of national identity and in-
dependence, such as the Royal Yacht Britannia; Remainers will
denounce the icon as cheesy or irrelevant; and Leavers will de-
nounce the Remainers as metropolitan snobs. The danger is that
these wars will shift from safe subjects like passports and yachts
to fraught ones such as refugees.

Fireworks and damp squibs
The more tentative prediction is that the high drama of the sec-
ond half of the year won’t change very much. Parliament will not
vote down the bill to leave the EU. Mrs May’s government won’t
fall. Mr Corbyn will not become prime minister (yet). And Britain
won’t hold a referendum on the terms of Brexit. The only real
chance of reversing Brexit is if the British people change their
minds, and so far there is no sign of this happening. The establish-
ment is doing an even worse job of ﬁghting to overturn Brexit
than it did to resist it in the ﬁrst place. An astonishing proportion
of anti-Brexiteers seem to come adorned with titles and company
directorships. Mr Corbyn continues to equivocate. Adding to the
sense of inevitability is the fact that the governing party is over-
whelmingly one of Brexiteers. A new survey by Queen Mary
University of London and YouGov reveals that only 14% of Tory
party members want a second referendum and only 25% support
continued membership of the single market (the ﬁgures for La-
bour members are 78% and 87%).
“Darkest Hour”, a new ﬁlm about Winston Churchill, is a re-
minder that the direction of history can always be changed pro-
vided that politicians possess enough will and courage. The Re-
mainers may yet ﬁnd a hero. Mr Corbyn may get oﬀ the fence. But
it seems much more likely that the drift that will characterise the
ﬁrst half of the year will characterise the second half as well. “It’s
always darkest before the dawn,” John McCain, an American
senator and former presidential candidate, likes to point out.
“And then you get punched in the face.” 7

THIS will be a year of two halves in British politics. The ﬁrst six
months will be dominated by drift. Theresa May will hold on
as prime minister despite backbench discontent. Brexit will
slouch ahead despite a growing sense of angst. The second half
of the year will bring the possibility of high drama—of Parliament
voting against Mrs May’s draft deal with the European Union, of
the government collapsing, and of Jeremy Corbyn entering
Downing Street. This column will oﬀer two ﬁrm predictions for
the era of drift and a more tentative one for the era of drama.
The ﬁrst prediction is that the House of Lords will play a more
prominent role than it has since before the ﬁrst world war, when
the Lords tried to block the Liberal government’s reforms and Da-
vid Lloyd George, the chancellor of the exchequer, mocked them
as “ﬁve hundred men accidentally chosen from among the ranks
of the unemployed”. The Lords have a constitutional duty to scru-
tinise the EU withdrawal bill, which is making its way through
the Commons. But the scrutiny could easily ﬂare into a political
crisis, given that a majority of peers strongly oppose Brexit.
Some leading Lords are spoiling for a ﬁght with the govern-
ment. Andrew Adonis, a Labour peer, has resigned as chairman
of the government’s infrastructure commission to devote him-
self to stopping Brexit. Michael Heseltine, a Tory, has said that he
regards Jeremy Corbyn’s Labour Party as less of a threat to the
country than Brexit. Others worry that the withdrawal bill hands
vast powers to the executive, which will use them to water down
employment and other rights currently enshrined in EU law.
All this means that, oddly, the unelected House of Lords will
have a more profound debate on the biggest change in Britain in
half a century than will the elected House of Commons. The
Lords include articulate, experienced people on both sides: John
Kerr, for instance, knows as much as anybody about Article 50 of
the EU treaty, since he was its principal author. The Lords are also
freer to speak out than MPs, since for the most part they have al-
ready bagged what patronage they want. Conventional opinion
will be turned on its head, as liberals rediscover the virtues of a re-
vising chamber of experienced public servants (the meritocracy
incarnate!), while conservatives rant about doddery old fools
frustrating the will of the people.
The Lords will probably send the withdrawal bill back to the

International

The Economist Januar y 6th 2018 43

The world’s worst airports

The departure gates of hell

An informal survey of the most horrible places to be lost in transit
LIKE expensive watches that never break,
obstructing them. When your correspon-
the world’s best airports can be boring.
dent was booked on a UN ﬂight, he was as-
You land, breeze through passport control
sured by the government that his papers
and check into a hotel within minutes. The
were in order. Yet at the airport he was told
experience is pleasant, but not memorable.
to get a fourth permit, as well as the three
The worst airports have more character. To
pricey ones he had already obtained. This
adapt Tolstoy, lovely airports are all alike,
required a trip across town and a tedious
but every wretched airport is wretched in
haggle. Predictably, he missed his plane.
its own way. 
Juba has three terminals, but only one is
Consider Juba. The airport in South Su-
in use. After South Sudan became inde-
dan’s capital is a sweltering tent next to a
pendent in 2011, the government planned
festering puddle. Planes are often late, so
to build an airy structure of glass, steel and
passengers must sweat for hours. The de-
concrete. Work started in 2012, but stopped
parture lounge has no toilets, no food and
when the bills were not paid. In 2016 the
no queuing system. Lucky is the traveller
government decided to build a more mod-
who ﬁnds a chair that is only half-broken.
est terminal. But it, too, stands half-com-
Since dirty water and tropical diseases are
pleted and empty, next to the tented camp
common, so are upset stomachs. Tough
that people actually have to use. Travellers
luck. Travellers should have thought twice
are advised to bring a good, long book. 
before eating salad. 
Security is haphazard. Big important
people’s ﬂunkies carry their bags, which
are ostentatiously passed round, not
through, the scanner. Since the machine
seldom works, little people are in eﬀect up-
graded to big important status by not hav-
ing their bags scanned for guns and explo-
sives, either.
South Sudan is at war, so many UN
planes take oﬀ from Juba carrying aid
workers and emergency supplies. Aggres-
sive oﬃcials in sunglasses take pleasure in

All are bored
Working out which is the world’s worst air-
port is not easy. The best rough-and-ready
attempt is the Guide to Sleeping in Air-
ports, a website that publishes an annual
survey based on voluntary submissions
from irate travellers. It ranks airports by
qualities such as discomfort, poor service,
bad food, cumbersome immigration pro-
cedures and how hard it is to grab forty
winks while waiting for a connection. 
Overall, Juba was rated worst in 2017.

Since photographing any airport in South
Sudan will get you arrested, the descrip-
tion of its “horriﬁc smells and ﬁlth” is ac-
companied by an artist’s impression
which makes the departure lounge look far
nicer than it is.
The ranking is inevitably skewed by
sampling bias. It misses truly awful places
that hardly anyone visits, and over-em-
phasises less egregious ones that handle
more people. Juba won its “worst in the
world” ranking not only on demerit but
also because so many foreign charity
workers pass through and complain about
it. Jeddah, in Saudi Arabia, comes second
not because it is really the second-worst in
the world but because it is swamped with
haj pilgrims every year and cannot cope.
Because gripes spring from disappoint-
ment, expectations matter. Travellers in the
rougher parts of the world applaud wildly
when a plane lands without crashing;
more pampered types are enraged if the
Wi-Fi is slow. It was the mismatch between
expectation and reality that doubtless pro-
pelled three Greek hubs (Crete, Santorini
and Rhodes) into the Sleeping in Airports
worst ten. Hordes of northern Europeans
ﬂew to Greece for a cheap holiday in 2017,
where they encountered strikes, delays
and other indignities to which they were
unaccustomed. Many reached for their
smartphones and complained. 
To illuminate some of the gaps in exist-
ing rankings of bad airports, The Economist
conducted an unscientiﬁc, anecdotal poll
of its globe-trotting correspondents. It at-
tracted more, and more passionate, re-
sponses than nearly any other internal sur-
vey we have done. Here are some of our
reﬂections from the departure gates of hell. 
Several airports in war zones are worse 

1

at and swatted by swagger-stick-wielding
Saudi policemen. Anyone who falls asleep
risks a thrashing.”
Rules change at borders, and some air-
port oﬃcials enforce them mindlessly. One
correspondent recalls that in Santiago,
Chile: “I once got detained for two hours
for failing to declare an unopened, sealed
bag of almonds. I then had to write a decla-
ration expressing my contrition for bring-
ing the nuts. When I failed to do so without
cracking up I was threatened with arrest.
The lady next to me was being interrogated
for smuggling in a lone banana.”
The worst airports reﬂect the vices of
the governments that
regulate them.
Pyongyang has a totalitarian vibe. A corre-
spondent writes: “The plane played rous-
ing music when we ﬂew over the border
into North Korea, and we were handed
copies of the national newspaper and
asked not to fold it, since it had a photo of
Kim Jong Il on the front page.” The only
consolation is that the airport has a choco-
late-fondue fountain.
Venezuela’s half-Marxist, half-gangster,
wholly incompetent government, which
has prompted much of the middle class to
emigrate, does not make the journey easy
or pleasant. Our Bello columnist grumbles
of Caracas: “Your hand baggage will be
searched in detail twice (by the National
Guard, who are drug smugglers who claim
to be ﬁghting drugs).” Our organised-crime
correspondent also has miserable memo-
ries: “The departures board showed our
ﬂight as delayed up to the moment when it
showed it as closed. I waited endless hours
for the next ﬂight in a fast-food restaurant,
the only place with seats, and watched a
mange-ridden dog licking out the polysty-
rene containers strewn on the ﬂoor.”
Poor countries have an excuse for poor

44 International

2 than Juba. Our Africa editor cites Bangui,
in the Central African Republic: “The fence
around it has been stolen, so when big jets
come in to land the pilots keep their hands
on the throttle so they can pull up if they
see people trying to run across the runway
(which lies between a refugee camp and
the city, and so has lots of crossing traf-
ﬁc). On the plus side it has sandbagged
bunkers on its roof and was designated the
ﬁnal fallback position by French forces dur-
ing the civil war, so if you are in it you are
about as safe as you can be.” 
Although each awful airport is unique,
four themes recur: danger, bullying by oﬃ-
cials, theft and delay. Sometimes, all these
reinforce each other. For example, it takes
ages to get through Lubumbashi airport
(in the Democratic Republic of Congo) be-
cause truculent security oﬃcials slow
things down in the hope that passengers
will give them “un cadeau” to hurry up. If
you hand over $1, they let you board with-
out your bags getting checked at all. Such
transactions are often referred to as
“bribes”, but are really a form of extortion
with menaces. They make air travel in
places like Congo slower, riskier, costlier
and much more unpleasant. 
Air travellers make tempting targets for
thieves. They are rich enough to aﬀord an
air ticket, which in many places makes
them rich indeed. They carry luggage,
some of it valuable. They are often far from
home and unfamiliar with local rules. Fi-
nally, airports are full of choke points
through which travellers must pass if they
are to board their planes, creating opportu-
nities for crooked oﬃcials to ﬂeece them. 
The ones in Manila are especially cre-
ative. Some have been known to plant bul-
lets in luggage so they can “ﬁnd” them and
demand bribes not to have the owners ar-
rested. This scam is known in Tagalog as
“laglag bala” (“drop bullet”).
In Johannesburg the pilfering is covert
but rampant. Our correspondent grum-
bles: “Despite packing absolutely nothing
of value in my checked bags they are regu-
larly riﬂed through and were twice slashed
open (they weren’t even locked). Once I
found someone else’s sunglasses case in
my bag; mislaid, perhaps, by luggage han-
dlers in a looting frenzy.”
Some travellers are harassed by oﬃcials
who seem to fear that, if they do not look
busy, they will be replaced by machines, as
many have been at modern airports. The
magniﬁcently uniformed functionary in
Delhi who demands to see your papers—
despite having just watched another func-
tionary inspect them—falls into this catego-
ry. Other oﬃcials harass travellers for the
sheer fun of wielding power. Our former
Cairo bureau chief writes, of Saudi immi-
gration procedures: “The queues are subtly
divided by nationality and caste. If you
happen to be a Baloch labourer, your lot is
to sit on the ﬂoor for hours, getting barked

The Economist Januar y 6th 2018

airports. Rich countries do not, which is
perhaps why travellers are particularly
irked to ﬁnd grottiness in, say, Brussels, the
heart of the European Union and a noted
centre of gastronomy. Our Charlemagne
columnist writes of Charleroi, its second
airport: “It is grim, grimy and cramped, and
has atrocious food. The planes leave and
land at ungodly hours. And the only real
way into town is a coach that runs every 30
minutes and is frequently overbooked:
more than once I’ve queued in the rain
only to see it drive oﬀ as I reach the front.”
Many correspondents moaned about Ber-
lin, where a new, unﬁnished terminal is six
years late. Another European airport that
elicits howls is Luton, which claims, fanci-
fully, to be close to London. An intern
writes: “Going on holiday and returning to
Luton is like having a wonderful dream
and waking up to ﬁnd yourself in a puddle
under a railway bridge.”
Airports all around the world have to
cope with growing crowds. The number of
passengers has roughly doubled since
2005, to an estimated 4bn in 2017. Some
have done so brilliantly, harnessing tech-
nology and smart design to usher more
people swiftly through. Singapore, Seoul
and Munich score highly on this measure. 
American airports, by and large, do not.
This is not simply because security has
grown tighter since 2001—that
is true
everywhere. It is because security and im-
migration screening are far more hassle-
some than they need to be. Border oﬃcials
are rude, and there are too few of them.
Surveys suggest that every year millions of
tourists shun the world’s greatest country
because getting in is so horrible. A “trusted
traveller” programme speeds things up a
bit, but only for a handful of passengers.
Idiotic bureaucracy abounds. Travellers
from Europe to Latin America who change
planes in the United States must pass
through immigration control, thus running
the risk of missing their connection. What
is the point of asking people who do not
wish to enter the United States why they
wish to enter the United States? Transit pas-
sengers in Singapore or Nairobi do not
have their time wasted like this. 
Our overall judgment (readers are invit-
ed to visit our travel blog, Gulliver, to dis-
pute it) is that, adjusted for national in-
come per head, several busy American
airports would be contenders for worst in
the world. Washington Dulles has the
worst-designed ground transport: travel-
lers must enter and leave a mobile pod by
the same door, so everyone crowds round
in the hope of getting oﬀ ﬁrst, thus blocking
it. JFK is the main gateway to the world’s
capital of consumerism, yet scarcely any
retail therapy is available to treat travellers’
boredom. But Miami is surely worst of all.
The queues at passport control take nearly
as long to navigate as Leif Erikson took to
cross the Atlantic in a longboat. 7

Business

Business in South Korea 

Diary of a sniper

S E O U L

The Economist Januar y 6th 2018 45

Also in this section
46 Stymied: Ant in Amer ica 
47 Money-launder ing in Canada
48 Salesforce’s pitch
49 Schumpeter: The year of the
incumbent

For daily coverage of business, visit
Economist.com/business-ﬁnance 

in 1996, and embezzlement and tax evasion
in 2008. In 2015 and 2016 Ms Park released
from prison early the bosses of SK Group,
the third-biggest conglomerate, and CJ
Group, another chaebol. Most have been
let oﬀ because of their ﬁrms’ importance to
the economy. The total asset value of the
ﬁve biggest chaebol, measured in April
2016, reached over half of the country’s
GDP for the year (see chart).
Moon Jae-in, the left-of-centre president
who won by a landslide in a snap election
in May, is the ﬁrst to promise an end to po-
litically-motivated amnesties. He has
pledged, too, to abandon what he calls
South Korea’s “chaebol-focused growth
strategy”. Small and medium-sized enter-
prises (SMEs) feel squeezed by the national
champions, to which many say they are
beholden as suppliers or by which some
are gobbled up, often for valuable machin-
ery or technology. Innovation and entre-
preneurship suﬀer as a result.
Mr Moon’s resolve to help SMEs means
that Mr Kim, whom he appointed, has
stronger political backing than perhaps
any previous fair-trade commissioner. As
an activist, Mr Kim was once turfed out of a
meeting of Samsung shareholders for ha-

1

800

1,000

1,200

1,400

1,600

1,800

Other 26

*Year to Apr il    †At Apr il 30th

South Korea’s antitrust tsar has a shot at getting the chaebol to respect the law
AS KIM SANG-JO was preparing last May
1970s.) Both women are now behind bars
to make the switch from snappy share-
on charges of corruption—as is the coun-
holder activist to a regulatory role as South
try’s most prominent business scion, Lee
Korea’s fair-trade commissioner, he had a
Jae-yong of Samsung.
simple message for the country’s big con-
Mr Lee, presumed heir to the electron-
glomerates: “Please do not break the law.”
ics-to-theme-park giant, has been Sam-
Not one to make bosses quake in their
sung’s de facto boss since his father fell ill
brogues, exactly. And yet the chaebol, as the
in 2014. In August he was sentenced to ﬁve
country’s family-controlled empires are
years in prison, charged with bribing Ms
known, are responding to his call for re-
Park in order to win support for an $8bn
merger of two aﬃliates, Samsung C&T and
form. Addressing complaints about gover-
nance, a few have brought far-ﬂung busi-
Cheil, which tightened his hold over the
nesses into a simpler holding-company
group. (He denies any wrongdoing and is
structure. Others have set up funds to pro-
appealing; a ﬁrst judgment is due in the
vide support to suppliers, which have long
coming weeks.)
accused the giants of treating them badly.
To many, all this marks a watershed in
Another group is paying out record divi-
chaebol history; Mr Kim agrees. Mr Lee’s fa-
dends to once-disregarded shareholders.
ther, for instance, twice received presiden-
Mr Kim was preaching, if not yet to the
tial pardons, after convictions for bribery
converted, then to the disconcerted. The
chaebol have had a bruising couple of
years. Nine of South Korea’s most power-
ful bosses, some rarely seen in public, were
grilled on television by politicians in De-
cember 2016 as part of an investigation into
collusion. All denied that they had sought
favours in return for the billions of won
they paid into charitable foundations con-
trolled by Choi Soon-sil, once a conﬁdante
of Park Geun-hye, a former president
ousted in March. (Her father, Park Chung-
hee, helped the chaebol ﬂourish with state
money when he ruled in the 1960s and

South Korea, 31 major chaebol, 2016, won trn

Too big to play fair

GDP in 2016

Revenues*

Assets†

0

Sources: Korea Fair Trade Commission; Nikkei Asian Review; KOSIS

200

400

600

Samsung

Hyundai

SK

LG Lotte

46 Business

The Economist Januar y 6th 2018

2 ranguing executives about rumoured ille-
gal political donations. Now that Mr Kim is
working in Mr Moon’s graft-busting gov-
ernment, the two men, says Mr Kim, are
“totally in agreement”. 
His mandate is popular, too. Over four-
ﬁfths of adults work in often unproductive
SMEs. An advocate for them says that Mr
Kim has “a real understanding of the
build-up of unfairness”. The Korea Fair
Trade Commission regulates monopolies
and upholds consumer rights. It found that
Lotte, a shopping-and-cinema empire,
broke national law on fair competition
most frequently in the 18 months from
April 2016, on no fewer than 33 counts. Dur-
ing that time Hyundai paid the highest to-
tal ﬁnes, of 85bn won ($74m). Close to two-
thirds of cases handled by the commission
involving the ten biggest chaebol were
breaches of the fair-trade act’s provisions.
Under Mr Kim, who seems wholly un-
afraid to live up to his public sobriquet as
the “chaebol sniper”, penalty fees are set to
double for businesses who break fair-trade
rules. A new ﬁne can be meted out to ﬁrms
that fail to hand over documents requested
by the commission; non-compliance is
now a criminal oﬀence. 
Lee Jae-hyung, an expert on corporate
governance at the Korea Development In-
stitute, a think-tank, says such measures
matter greatly, because they raise public
awareness. Past leniency towards badly-
behaved bigwigs means South Koreans
have often been oblivious to the serious-
ness of their infractions. Public pressure is
needed to help pass proposed laws on
chaebol reform, since Mr Moon’s party
lacks an absolute majority. Mr Kim has
also raised the possibility of stronger mea-
sures against cross-shareholdings. 

In the sights
The sniper would rather his targets surren-
der willingly and is encouraging “volun-
tary” reform. That approach might last lon-
ger than big, forced changes, observers
reckon. Mr Kim is also counting on the fact
that the younger, third generation of chae-
bol bosses “sees change as inevitable”, as
Chinese competition gnaws at proﬁts and
as investors demand a bigger slice of what
is left. Fatter shareholder returns should be
the yardstick for progress, he says. Simpli-
fying corporate structures, often more
complex than a semiconductor circuit,
would also help correct the “Korea dis-
count”: the low valuation of ﬁrms relative
to developed-country peers, thought to
stem from investors’ perceptions that they
have next to no say in decisions. This year’s
shareholder-meeting season, in March,
will be a key test of whether the chaebol are
moving in the right direction.
Change is undoubtedly in the air. In
2016 Samsung promised to start returning
half its free cashﬂow to investors. Not long
ago this was an “unimaginable” step, says

Mr Kim. In his ﬁrst meeting with the “big
four”—Samsung, Hyundai, LG and SK—in
June, he asked their professional managers
to reform supply-chain pyramids (to avoid
any whiﬀ of collusion, he does not meet
the owner-families). That chain of relation-
ships is widely thought of as an example of
gapjil, a term for the bullying of ﬁrms lower
in the hierarchy. SK Group has since an-
nounced a 160bn-won fund to pay second-
and third-tier subcontractors directly if a
ﬁrst-tier supplier
is temporarily cash-
strapped. Mr Kim is conﬁdent he can con-
vince the chaebol that the costs of engaging

in unfair trade outweigh the beneﬁts.
Some anti-chaebol types carp that Mr
Kim now seems to be more chaebol sympa-
thiser than sniper, and that a disarming ap-
proach will get ﬁrms to play nice only as
long as it takes for the government’s re-
formist fervour to cool. That is unfair, but it
is true that obstacles to change remain in a
country where the chaebol’s glittering suc-
cess has given them sway over politics, me-
dia, the judiciary and academia. The econ-
omy is strong, but future weakness would
put pressure on Mr Moon to release chae-
bol bosses from prison. Dozens of reform-

1

Ant Financial and MoneyGram

Blocked transfer

N EW Y O R K

China’s Ant Financial is forced to abandon a big American acquisition
“THE geopolitical environment has
changed considerably since…a
year ago.” That was the explanation
given this week by Alex Holmes, chief
executive of MoneyGram International, a
Dallas-based American money-transfer
ﬁrm, for Ant Financial abandoning its
$1.2bn deal to buy his ﬁrm. Ant, the on-
line-payments aﬃliate of Alibaba Group,
a Chinese e-commerce giant, had outbid
Euronet, an American rival, in 2017 and
secured the approval of MoneyGram’s
board for the acquisition. In normal
times, Ant would have secured the prize.
But it is up against a rising tide of
anti-China sentiment in Washington, DC.
Donald Trump has often argued that
China does not play fair in global com-
merce. The sense that China and its com-
panies are not to be trusted is spreading
on Capitol Hill, too. Ant’s bid was
blocked by the Committee on Foreign
Investment in the United States (CFIUS),
a government body reporting to the
Treasury. It reviews such deals for nation-
al-security implications. Two congress-
men claimed that approving Ant’s pur-
chase of MoneyGram might allow
“malicious actors” to get hold of ﬁnancial
data belonging to American soldiers and
their families. 
Alibaba seemed the least likely of
Chinese ﬁrms to encounter a backlash in
America. Alipay, Ant’s online-payment
oﬀering, has already entered into part-
nerships with Verifone and First Data,
two American payments ﬁrms, and is
accepted at some 175,000 locations in the
country. In January 2017 Jack Ma, its
charismatic boss, met with then Presi-
dent-elect Trump and promised to create
a million American jobs through cross-
border e-commerce. News of the deal for
MoneyGram came shortly afterwards. 
This week’s decision is not just a blow
for Alibaba. It is another sign of a deterio-

rating environment for Chinese ﬁrms in
America. The Ant deal is the most promi-
nent transaction blocked by CFIUS re-
cently, but it is not the only one. In Sep-
tember Mr Trump sided with CFIUS to
stop China’s Canyon Bridge Capital
Partners, a government-backed invest-
ment ﬁrm, from acquiring America’s
Lattice Semiconductor, a tech ﬁrm. In
November, China Oceanwide Holdings
said that it would delay the deadline for
closing its $2.7bn takeover of Genworth
Financial, an American insurer, until
April due to problems with CFIUS. 
A thaw looks unlikely. Bipartisan
eﬀorts are now under way in Congress to
grant CFIUS broader powers still to block
foreign investment in American compa-
nies, especially by Chinese investors.
Euronet, meanwhile, which hails from
nearby Kansas, has seen its warnings
about the dangers of handing American
data to Chinese companies pay oﬀ. It
may now rebid for MoneyGram. 

It didn’t mean jack

The Economist Januar y 6th 2018 

2 ing bills languish in parliament. They
range from introducing electronic proxy
voting rights for shareholders (because
conglomerates often schedule simulta-
neous meetings) to putting limits on the
use of treasury shares in mergers, which
owner-families often sell to allies (as in the
merger of Samsung aﬃliates).
As for existing laws, loopholes abound,
says Park Sangin of Seoul National Univer-
sity: although four of the ten biggest con-
glomerates have moved to a holding-com-
pany structure, dozens of their aﬃliates
remain outside it. According to an estimate
by Bloomberg, a ﬁnancial-information
provider, tax-exempt chaebol foundations
hold about 13trn won in shares between
them; through these, sons and daughters
secure shares in key aﬃliates but dodge in-
heritance tax. A court ruled in October that
Samsung’s $8bn merger was in fact lawful,

Money-launder ing in Canada

Snow-washing

because “strengthening the control of an
individual is not banned by law”. (This rul-
ing does not aﬀect the case against Mr Lee.) 
Mr Kim has no intention of giving the
chaebol “a completely new face”, he says.
That is “not only impossible” in his three-
year term, but “not worthwhile” as the
ﬁrms are a “precious resource” for South
Korea. Samsung Electronics, that conglom-
erate’s darling, thrived in 2017, clocking up
record proﬁts, contributing to a surge in ex-
ports for the year, all while Mr Lee has been
cooped up on criminal charges. Un-
harmed corporate performance has in the
past been taken as a sign that misconduct is
so commonplace in South Korean con-
glomerates that investors do not care. But
with Mr Kim now minding the shop, it
could just as well be taken as a sign of
something better: that the chaebol are be-
coming more than just a family aﬀair. 7

O T T AW A

Loose rules on private-company formation are aiding money-launderers
WHEN reports surfaced in 2016 of for-
eign students with no known in-
come buying homes worth millions of dol-
lars in Vancouver, locals said it was yet
more evidence that foreigners were inﬂat-
ing prices in Canada’s dearest property
market. It was also evidence of a home-
grown problem. The students turned out
to be ﬁgureheads for anonymous ﬁrms
whose ultimate owners cannot be identi-
ﬁed because the information is not legally
required by the land registry. Canadian au-
thorities are concerned about the abuses
caused by such opacity. The property mar-
ket may well be attracting foreign crimi-
nals and corrupt oﬃcials seeking to laun-

der dirty money, notes David Eby, the
attorney-general of British Columbia.
Other countries have taken steps to
make sure that anonymous ownership of
ﬁrms does not help criminals. In 2014 G20
leaders agreed to make the ultimate own-
ership of legal entities more transparent.
Britain, for example, set up a searchable,
public database of beneﬁcial or ultimate
owners of all ﬁrms, limited-liability part-
nerships and Societas Europaea (ﬁrms
based and regulated in the European Un-
ion as a whole). All EU states will eventual-
ly have to do the same under a 2015 anti-
money-laundering directive. 
With not a palm tree in sight and a rep-

Business 47

utation for being boringly well-run, Cana-
da is an unlikely haven for crooks and tax
avoiders. But it has long had a reputation as
a place to snow-wash money. In 2009 the
national police force estimated that up to
C$15bn ($12bn) was being laundered in the
country each year (an estimated annual
$2trn is laundered globally). One attraction
is that establishing a company is so easy—
tougher identity checks are required to get
a library card than to form a private ﬁrm, as
Jon Allen of Transparency International
Canada noted before a parliamentary
committee in December. 
Not all corporate ownership is opaque.
Publicly traded ﬁrms are subject to securi-
ties laws which require major share-
holders to be disclosed. The problem lies
with ﬁrms that are not listed on a stock ex-
change. An anti-money-laundering law
passed in 2000 directs banks, securities
dealers, life-insurance ﬁrms and other ﬁ-
nancial entities to make “reasonable ef-
forts” to identify the owners of ﬁrms they
do business with; left to carry the load,
they do their best to collect information on
all counterparties, but it is not enough. 
A review in 2016 of Canada by the Fi-
nancial Action Task Force, an intergovern-
mental body set up in 1989 to combat mon-
ey-laundering, concluded that only a
fraction of the country’s 2.5m legal entities
“had accuracy checks performed with re-
spect to beneﬁcial ownership”. It also cata-
logued a wide range of ways in which Ca-
nadian front companies were being used
to purchase assets, including property, or
to move money in and out of the country
“to 
layer and 
legitimise unexplained
sources of income”.
Political and legal authorities increas-
ingly recognise a need for change, but pro-
gress has been glacial. When ﬁnance min-
isters from the federal government, the ten
provinces and three territories met to dis-
cuss the issue last month, they went no fur-
ther than agreeing to encourage ﬁrms to
keep a record of their ultimate owners,
ready to give to authorities if they request
it. Part of the problem is that jurisdiction is
split between national and sub-national
governments, with only a tenth of Cana-
da’s companies incorporated at the nation-
al level. Any agreement to change the rules
has to reconcile diﬀerences in how prov-
inces deﬁne beneﬁcial ownership and col-
lect such information. 
Canada’s existing money-laundering
and terrorist-ﬁnancing legislation also con-
tains a gaping hole: lawyers are not cov-
ered, because they successfully argued in
court that turning over such information
violated solicitor-client privilege. One On-
tario lawyer bragged to a police under-
cover agent in 2002 that this victory meant
it was 20 times safer for a lawyer to launder
money in Canada than in the United
States—not the sort of contrast that the
Great White North relishes. 7

48 Business

Software-as-a-ser vice

The tower of Benioﬀ

S A N F R A N C I S C O

Salesforce has reached great heights. Can it keep climbing?
VISIBLE from nearly every corner of San
Francisco and from up to 30 miles away,
the new skyscraper that will be the head-
quarters of Salesforce, a software giant,
stands 1,100 feet (326 metres) tall, making it
the highest building in America west of
Chicago. On January 8th, after four years
of building, workers will start moving in. 
Those who know Salesforce’s founder,
Marc Benioﬀ, ﬁnd his ﬁrm’s new digs ﬁt-
ting. As creator of a ﬁrm that caters to sales-
people, he is himself a ﬁercely ambitious
salesman. In its 2018 ﬁscal year, which ends
on January 31st, Salesforce is expected to
reach $10bn in annual revenue for the ﬁrst
time. It plans to more than double that ﬁg-
ure over the next four years. Even that is
not enough. In 20 years Mr Benioﬀ’s
“dream” is $100bn of revenue, he muses.
Can his towering expectations be met?
Founded in 1999, Salesforce claims a com-
bination of longevity and size that few tech
companies have achieved; its market capi-
talisation is $76bn. It is the largest tech ﬁrm
with headquarters in San Francisco and
the world’s fourth-largest software ﬁrm,
after Microsoft, Oracle and Germany’s
SAP, which were all founded in the 1970s. 
Mr Benioﬀ was early to spot an oppor-
tunity in delivering software as a service,
meaning that software can be accessed re-
motely by users through the cloud, rather
than being installed on ﬁrms’ computers
on their premises. This mode of delivery
needs no upfront investment by compa-
nies for software that may go unused; in-
stead subscribers pay a fee for employees
that access it each month. Salesforce’s “cus-

tomer relationship management” soft-
ware, which helps companies keep track
of their clients and manage prospective
leads, is its main product, but it also oﬀers
tools for customer service, marketing, ana-
lytics and digital commerce. 
Mr Benioﬀ is a key element of the pro-
duct too; a mix of showman, digital guru,
political activist and philanthropist. Those
close to him call it “marc-eting”. Seeing
ﬁrms struggling to adapt to technology
trends, he puts himself forward as a digital
consigliere, travelling globally to advise
bosses. Each autumn Salesforce spends an
estimated $30m to put on Dreamforce,
drawing some 170,000 participants to San
Francisco with a promise of parties and
prominent speakers. 
Not everyone appreciates his sales-
manship. He has taken many public posi-
tions, often through Twitter—for example,
on gay rights and equal pay for women.
“As political leaders become weaker, chief
executives have to become stronger,” says
Mr Benioﬀ. To date the ﬁrm has given
$168m in philanthropic grants. Many cus-
tomers like to feel they are not only buying
software but doing good for the world,
says Keith Weiss of Morgan Stanley. But
Salesforce’s annual “10-K” securities ﬁling
lists its political positions as a risk for share-
holders. According to former executives,
Mr Benioﬀ’s fondness for setting policy by
tweets, such as cancelling events in states
that have issued anti-gay laws, can some-
times cause organisational chaos. 
That is not the only drawback. Gerhard
Gschwandtner, boss of a ﬁrm that publish-

Benioﬀ’s guide to upselling

The Economist Januar y 6th 2018

es a magazine, Selling Power, calls him “a
merchant of hope” but also cautions that
“selling the future can attract focus away
from weaknesses in the present moment”.
Only around a quarter of his ﬁrm’s sales
come from outside the Americas. Its busi-
ness generates plenty of cash—in its 2017
ﬁscal year it produced around $2.2bn—but
its operating proﬁts have been persistently
low. That is in large part because it spends
so lavishly on sales and marketing—a total
of $10bn between 2015 and 2017.
Investors reckon Salesforce’s business
will keep generating lots of cash as it ex-
pands into new areas of software. But there
is a risk that marketing costs stay high and
that Salesforce splurges on deals in order to
grow. In recent years it has diversiﬁed its
business lines mainly through acquisi-
tions. Some purchases, such as Demand-
ware, a cloud-based provider of e-com-
merce services that it bought for $2.9bn in
cash in 2016, were sensible, but others,
such as Buddy Media, a social-media ﬁrm
it acquired for around $750m in 2012, are
viewed as expensive mistakes. Mr Benioﬀ
also ﬂirted with buying Twitter in 2016 but
backed oﬀ when shareholders protested.
They also worried when Salesforce bid for
LinkedIn, a professional social network;
Microsoft bought it for $26.2bn. 
As for organic growth, Salesforce was
later than Microsoft and some other ﬁrms
to invest properly in artiﬁcial intelligence
(AI), which is expected to make software
more predictive and useful. In 2016 it
bought an AI startup, MetaMind, for
around $33m, and is using the talent it
scooped up in the deal to put together an
AI oﬀering, called Einstein, which aims to
make Salesforce’s software feel more per-
sonalised and insightful. Yet some wonder
whether it can close the AI gap on rivals.
Salesforce may dominate sales-man-
agement software, but in newer areas of
business, such as digital commerce and
marketing, it faces stiﬀ competition. Goo-
gle and Amazon, for example, have an
edge in the two ﬁelds, and enormous re-
sources. Nor are Salesforce’s existing com-
petitors, Oracle, Microsoft and Adobe,
showing any inclination to surrender in
the battle over sales software. LinkedIn
gives Microsoft access to valuable sales-
lead data. Startups could yet beat Sales-
force on price or innovation. 
Indeed, while Mr Benioﬀ’s pitch is all
about supersized future revenues, some
people wonder if Salesforce will always re-
main independent. Its market value means
it is neither a giant like Microsoft or Oracle
nor a nimble startup. It is not easy to be a
midsized publicly listed software com-
pany facing competition from tech giants.
In 2015 Microsoft reportedly considered
buying Salesforce, but a price could not be
agreed. If a potential deal were once again
to present itself, who better than a master
salesman to see it through? 7

The Economist Januar y 6th 2018 

Business 49

Schumpeter

The year of the incumbent

In 2018 conventional ﬁrms will give Silicon Valley a run for its money

e-commerce and to build a global brand with a digital presence.
Incumbents have lots going for them. They own 80% of the
commercial world’s data, as Ms Rometty has noted. If AI is set to
change civilisation by using data to make better decisions, most
of the historical data-sets about, say, jet-engine performance or
clothing supply chains belong to established ﬁrms, beyond the
reach of Amazon and Facebook. Incumbents have vast resources:
among S&P 500 ﬁrms, their total cashﬂow is four times that of
tech ﬁrms’ and 18 times what venture capitalists invest each year.
Established giants also enjoy barriers to entry such as strong
brands and lobbying skills, the latter being especially crucial in
America’s money-driven political system. Also on December
14th, American regulators abolished “net neutrality” rules requir-
ing telecoms carriers to treat all internet traﬃc equally—a victory
for conventional telecoms and cable ﬁrms. Silicon Valley faces a
global regulatory “techlash” over issues such as privacy and tax.
A typical approach by conventional ﬁrms is a blend of bolt-on
acquisitions of startups and organic investment in new technol-
ogies. GM has invested in Lyft, a ride-sharing ﬁrm, and developed
electric engines. On December 13th, Target, which operates dis-
count stores, bought Shipt, a online-delivery platform. Walmart
has bought Jet.com, an e-commerce ﬁrm. Western banks have
been busy buying ﬁntech ﬁrms, although the cleverest incum-
bents in ﬁnance are Asian. Ping An, a Chinese insurance ﬁrm, has
265m users for its app. DBS, South-East Asia’s biggest lender, has
set up online banks in both India and Indonesia.
A few ﬁrms are opting for huge deals. On December 3rd CVS, a
drugstore and health-care beneﬁts manager, said it would pay
$77bn for Aetna, a health-insurance company. The idea is to bulk
up and lock in customers before Amazon enters the business of
selling medicines. Within the tech industry, IBM is not the only
mature ﬁrm trying to adapt. In March Intel bought Mobileye for
$15bn—it specialises in chips and software for driverless cars.
Conventional wisdom says incumbent ﬁrms are timid about
technological change, scared to cannibalise proﬁts and trapped in
an unimaginative mindset. In 1997 Clayton Christensen laid out
this view in “The Innovator’s Dilemma”. Kodak, which folded
after failing to see that camera ﬁlm would become obsolete, is the
classic example. Yet for every Kodak there is a Marconi, that goes
too far, too fast. Formerly called GEC, it was Britain’s largest indus-
trial ﬁrm in the 1990s but collapsed after wrecking its balance-
sheet with acquisitions of fashionable but ﬂaky tech ﬁrms in 1999.

The stakes get higher
A few ﬁrms have already been indisciplined. John Flannery, Gen-
eral Electric’s new boss, has axed some digital projects after judg-
ing them extravagant. But no one is yet making existential wagers.
Taking a sample of eight incumbents, on average their digital ini-
tiatives are worth 14% of the size of the ﬁrm (using a range of met-
rics, including sales, investment and market value). So for exam-
ple, e-commerce eats up only a ﬁfth of Walmart’s investment
budget. Even Disney-Fox’s existing initiatives are small. Hulu, a
streaming service that it will control, makes losses equivalent to
less than a tenth of its parents’ annual spending on content.
Conventional ﬁrms’ digital bets will only grow larger, as more
bosses note the rising share prices of pioneers such as Walmart
and GM. Overall this makes sense, even if plenty of companies
make an utter hash of things. For large incumbents, in 2018 digital
strategy will stop being about trendy experiments and start being
a matter of life and death. 7

ACCORDING to Ginni Rometty, IBM’s boss, the digital revolu-
tion has two phases. In the ﬁrst, Silicon Valley ﬁrms make all
the running as they create new markets and eviscerate weak
ﬁrms in sleepy industries. This has been the story until now. Tech
ﬁrms have captured 42% of the rise in the value of America’s
stockmarket since 2014 as investors forecast they will win an
ever-bigger share of corporate proﬁts. A new, terrifying phrase
has entered the lexicon of business jargon: being “Amazoned”.
The second phase favours the incumbents, Ms Rometty be-
lieves, and is starting about now. They summon the will to adapt,
innovate to create new, digital, products and increase eﬃciency.
The schema is plainly self-serving. IBM is itself ﬁghting for surviv-
al against cloud-based tech rivals and most of its clients are con-
ventional ﬁrms. Yet she is correct that incumbents in many indus-
tries are at last getting their acts together on technology.
Enough time has elapsed for even the dopiest to see the threat.
It is 11 years since Netﬂix began streaming video and ﬁve since Tes-
la unveiled the Model S. The evisceration by tech ﬁrms of some
mid-sized businesses, such as department-store retail, has con-
centrated minds. Lagging share prices have helped. In 2017 Ford
ﬁred its boss, Mark Fields, despite near-record proﬁts. Its board
concluded he was complacent about technological change.
Taking a sample of America’s 20 most valuable non-tech
ﬁrms, 14 now have a digital dimension to their strategies. Some
blue-chip ﬁrms are mixing fashionable cocktails of e-commerce,
big data and artiﬁcial-intelligence (AI) initiatives. But others are
making comprehensive, multi-billion-dollar bets. General Mo-
tors is developing a suite of electric and autonomous vehicles.
Walmart is in the midst of a massive online shopping push. Inves-
tors view such initiatives as central to these ﬁrms’ prospects.
A round of mergers and acquisitions has kicked oﬀ as ﬁrms re-
spond to the threat from Silicon Valley. On December 14th Walt
Disney said it would spend $66bn buying most of 21st Century
Fox. One motivation for the deal is to counter the menace of
streaming video services, most notably those of Netﬂix and Ama-
zon. In 2019 Disney will stop distributing new ﬁlms through Net-
ﬂix and launch its own streaming services. On December 12th
Westﬁeld and Unibail, a pair of huge operators of shopping
malls, joined forces with two main aims: to bulk up in response to

G LOBA L I L L IC IT
TRAD E SUMM IT

Out of the 
shadows

March 22nd 
2018
Ku a la Lumpu r

Featured speakers:

KAI HSIANG ANG
Head of legal,  
South-East Asia, Israel, Japan 
and Asia-Pacific expansion 
eBay 

GLADYS CHUN
General counsel
Lazada Group

LUC DE BLIECK
Deputy director,  
Compliance and  
Facilitation Directorate 
World Customs Organization

SHISHIR PRIYADARSHI
Director,
Development Division 
World Trade Organization

I l l ic it t rade poses a rea l threat to econom ies and bus inesses , 
pub l ic hea lth , the env ironment , innovat ion and tax revenues , 
and prov ides funds for t ransnat iona l cr ime networks and 
terror ist organ isat ions . Determ in ing a course of act ion is of 
paramount importance for indust r ies and econom ies to prevent 
further harm - but where to start?

globalillicittrade.economist .com

Apply to attend*

globalillicittrade.economist.com
+852 2585 3312
asiaevents@economist .com

* This event is free to attend, however places are strictly 
limited. All registrations are subject to availability and 
approval by The Economist Events.

@EconomistEvents
#EconIllicitTrade

Finance and economics

Environmental economics in China

Towards a greener future

T I A N J I N 

China’s anti-pollution campaign may crimp growth by less than feared
LEO YAO thought he had nothing to fear
thing been heavy-handed. In Hebei, a
from the environment ministry. Before,
northern province, a ban on coal heating
when its inspectors visited his cutlery fac-
left thousands of residents shivering be-
tory, he says, they generated “loud thun-
cause the replacement, a switch to natural
der, little rain”. After warning him to clean
gas, was not yet ready.
up, they would, at worst, impose a negligi-
For the wider economy, the question is
ble ﬁne. Not so this time. In August dozens
how steep the cost will be. A sharp tighten-
of inspectors swarmed over his workshop
ing of environmental rules in the world’s
in Tianjin, just east of Beijing, and ordered
biggest polluter has the potential to be a
production to be halted. His doors remain
shock, both to China and the global econ-
shut today. If he wants to go on making
omy. Two worries are commonly heard:
knives and forks, he has been told that he
that it will drag down growth; and, at the
must move to more modern facilities in a
same time, cause inﬂation as production
less populated area.
cuts boost prices. Jiang Chao, an economist
Mr Yao’s company, which at its peak
with Haitong Securities, a broker, says it
employed 80 people, is just one minor ca-
could end up making for “classic stagﬂa-
sualty in China’s sweeping campaign to re-
tion”. So far, though, these worries are un-
duce pollution. For years the government
founded: growth has been solid and inﬂa-
has vowed to go green, yet made little pro-
gress. It has ﬂinched at reining in dirty in-
dustries, wary of the mass job losses that
seemed likely to ensue. But in the past few
months it has taken a harder line and
pressed on with pollution controls, hitting
coalminers, cement-makers, paper mills,
chemical factories, textile ﬁrms and more.
Tens of thousands of companies—most-
ly smaller ones, like Mr Yao’s—have been
forced to close, according to Chen Xing-
dong, an economist with BNP Paribas. In
the region around Beijing this winter, the
government has ordered steel mills to run
at half-capacity and aluminium-makers to
cut output by nearly a third. Implement-
ation, half-hearted in the past, has if any-

China, pr ice indices, Januar y 2015=100

Green shoots

Glyphosate

(weedkiller)

Neodymium

(rare ear th) 

Paper pulp

Coal

Source: Wind Info

160

140

Steel

120

100

80

60

2015

16

17

The Economist Januar y 6th 2018 51

Also in this section
52 Buttonwood: The markets in 2018
53 An Islamic-bond dispute
53 Amer ican banks and tax reform
54 The MiFID cuckoo
55 Free exchange: Investment returns
since 1870

For daily analysis and debate on economics, visit
Economist.com/economics

tion subdued. A possible explanation is
that the economic impact is lagging behind
the pollution controls. Another is that, con-
trary to received wisdom, China may be
able to raise its environmental standards
without paying a high price.
One thing is clear: China’s shift on pol-
lution is real. True, some extreme measures
are temporary, especially those aimed at
keeping Beijing’s sky blue this winter. But
many others will be lasting. As part of a
“war on pollution” declared in 2014, China
has detailed targets for cleaning up its air,
water and soil. On January 1st it introduced
an environmental-protection tax, replac-
ing a patchwork of pollution fees. Last
month it launched a market for trading car-
bon emissions, which, though scaled back
from early plans, will be the world’s larg-
est. Most crucially, the environment minis-
try, previously a political weakling, has
clout at last—as Mr Yao’s cutlery business
found to its chagrin. Besides ﬁning compa-
nies, inspectors have disciplined some
18,000 oﬃcials for laxity over pollution.
The tougher tactics have already made
a big dent in speciﬁc industries. Just 60% of
steel blast-furnaces are now in use, down
sharply since October and near a ﬁve-year
low. Thermal-power output is now actual-
ly declining year by year, evidence of
weakening demand. Companies are also
feeling the pinch. Schaeﬄer Group, a Ger-
man car-parts maker, warned in Septem-
ber that pollution controls would knock
out its supplier of needle bearings. Taiwan-
ese chipmakers in the city of Kunshan, an
electronics hub not far from Shanghai, say
the abrupt
tightening of water-quality
rules may lead them to move.
Upward pressure on production costs
has been intense. A surge in coal and steel
prices has attracted most attention, as Chi-
na has pushed companies to cut capacity
(see chart). But similar trends aﬀect a range 

1

52 Finance and economics

The Economist Januar y 6th 2018

2

of smaller industries. In July China banned
imports of 24 kinds of waste such as paper
and plastic; the ban came fully into eﬀect
on January 1st, but demand (and prices) for
raw pulp quickly jumped. Restrictions on
the chemicals industry have fuelled a 50%
increase in the price of glyphosate, a popu-
lar weedkiller, over the past few months.
Prices of rare-earth metals, notably two
used in electric magnets, have also soared.
Yet the biggest economic surprise of
China’s environmental campaign so far is
not that it has had an impact; it is how mut-
ed that impact has been. Yes, industrial
production has recently been weaker than

forecast, but it is still expanding at more
than 6% year on year. And yes, some com-
modity prices have shot up, but this has
had very little eﬀect on general inﬂation.
Three factors suggest that this benign
trend may endure. First, despite the com-
mon assumption that industries such as
steel or coal are vast, they in fact account
for a small, shrinking share of the Chinese
economy. Minsheng Securities, a broker,
calculates that the full complement of in-
dustries aﬀected by the pollution mea-
sures adds up to just 7% of total national in-
vestment. China has reached a stage of
development where manufacturing is fad-

ing in importance. Nearly 4m people may
lose jobs as a result of cuts in industrial ca-
pacity, but strong demand for labour in the
services sector, from restaurants to health
care, is cushioning that blow.
Second, price increases have been con-
centrated and show little sign of spreading
widely. Prices of coal and steel, the ﬁrst to
heat up, are already levelling oﬀ, making
the increases seem big one-oﬀ changes
rather than the start of inﬂationary spirals.
For the economy as a whole, it amounts to
a redistribution of resources. Companies
that use commodities as inputs face higher
costs. But producers beneﬁt. And since 

1

Buttonwood

Taking oﬀ the training wheels

J

F M A M J

J

2017

Source: Thomson Reuters

CBOE volatility index (Vix)*

J

F M A M J

J

2017

Strong and stable

A S O N D

J

2018

MSCI World index, Januar y 2nd 2017=100

120

110

100

90

16
14
12
10
8

A S O N D

J

2018

*Long-term average=19

Central banks are reducing support, but investors are sanguine
AFTER a bumper year for ﬁnancial mar-
kets in 2017, can 2018 be anything like
as good? Much will depend on the global
economy. The rally in stockmarkets
stretches back almost two years, to the
point when worries about an era of “sec-
ular stagnation” started to diminish.
The ﬁrst pieces of economic data to be
published in January—the purchasing
managers’ indices (PMI) for the manufac-
turing sector—were pretty upbeat. In the
euro zone the index recorded its highest
level since the survey began in 1997. Chi-
na’s PMI was stronger than expected, and
America’s index showed new orders at
their highest level in nearly 14 years. 
The obvious question is whether the
markets have anticipated the good news
about growth, and pushed share prices to
a level from which returns can only be
disappointing. The cyclically adjusted
price-earnings ratio of the American mar-
ket, which uses a ten-year average of pro-
ﬁts, is 32.4; it has been higher only in Sep-
tember 1929 (just before the Wall Street
crash) and during the dotcom bubble. 
A regular poll of global fund managers
in December by Bank of America Merrill
Lynch (BAML) found that a net 45%
thought that equities are overvalued, the
highest level in the more-than-20 years
the survey has been conducted. But a net
48% of investors still have a higher expo-
sure to stockmarkets than normal. The
discrepancy can be explained by their at-
titude to the other highly liquid asset
class: government bonds. A net 83% of
managers think they are overvalued.
Given the very low level of bond
yields (which fall as prices rise), it is hardly
surprising that investors are chary about
the asset category; a net 59% of managers
have a lower weighting in bonds than
normal. But partly because of the better
news on the global economy, they are

more hopeful about equities: stronger
growth should mean higher proﬁts. By the
third quarter of this year, investors are ex-
pecting S&P 500 companies to show annu-
al proﬁts growth of 11.9%. Another factor is
the American tax package just approved
by Congress; the BAML survey found that
more than 70% of fund managers thought
tax cuts would cause shares to rise. 
What was remarkable about 2017 was
not just that stockmarkets rose. It was that
they did so in such a steady manner. The
MSCI World index rose in almost every
month, and the volatility index, or Vix,
stayed at remarkably low levels (see chart).
None of the political headlines—the ten-
sions between America and North Korea,
the investigation into President Donald
Trump’s election victory, the inconclusive
German elections—seemed to bother in-
vestors for very long.
Politics could still sandbag the markets
in 2018, particularly if another war broke
out in Asia or the Middle East. But the more
immediate concern for investors will be

monetary policy. The Federal Reserve has
been steadily pushing up interest rates,
and the European Central Bank is reduc-
ing its monthly bond purchases. The com-
bination of low rates and quantitative
easing (QE) has been helpful for markets
ever since the ﬁnancial crisis. Like anx-
ious parents, central banks are taking the
training wheels oﬀ their children’s bicy-
cles and hoping they won’t crash.
David Bowers and Ian Harnett of Ab-
solute Strategy Research, a consultancy,
have a diﬀerent worry. They fear that in-
vestors may be caught out by a slowdown
in China. In 2017 Chinese interest rates
rose; this may start to have an economic
impact in the current year. The eﬀect will
not be dramatic (they think global growth
will slow to 3.3%) but it will be enough to
disturb the rosy consensus.
Messrs Bowers and Harnett conduct
their own survey of fund managers, and
they ﬁnd some inconsistencies in the out-
look. Though investors expect equities to
perform well, they are not enthusiastic
about high-yield bonds. Normally condi-
tions that are good for the former also
boost the latter. And investors also expect
the Vix to rise, an event that usually coin-
cides with poor equity performance.
These contradictions can best be ex-
plained by assuming that investors are
making the understandable bet that the
current year will look much like the previ-
ous one. Extrapolating from the past is a
well-known bias, and often applies to
economic forecasts as well. But that is to
ignore the nagging feeling that the events
of 2016 may have marked a historic turn-
ing-point, and that the new era will be
much more turbulent than before. To mis-
quote Mr Micawber: “Something un-
pleasant will turn up.”

Economist.com/blogs/buttonwood

The Economist Januar y 6th 2018 

2 metals and mining companies are heavily
indebted, the rebound in revenues is help-
ing to fortify their balance-sheets and, in
the process, easing Chinese ﬁnancial risks.
Lastly, green restrictions can them-
selves generate growth and jobs. China’s
drive for cleaner energy sources has gained
momentum. Estimates suggest it installed
nearly 55 gigawatts of solar-power capaci-
ty in 2017, more than the existing capacity
of any other country at the start of the year.
China accounts for about two-ﬁfths of glo-
bal production of electric cars. And in
more established industries, companies
feel pressure to upgrade. To stay in busi-
ness, Mr Yao says he will move his cutlery
factory to a new industrial park, where
waste-disposal standards are higher.
If the economic downside from China’s
clean-up remains
relatively mild, 
it
prompts an obvious question: why did it
take the government so long to get tough
on pollution? One big reason is surely the
uneven distribution of pain. Smokestack
industries are based in a small number of
provinces such as Shandong in the east
and Shanxi in the north. So long as en-
forcement was in local hands, oﬃcials had
little incentive to act. None wanted to
throttle companies in their own backyard.
But from a national perspective, the eco-
nomic trade-oﬀs of greener growth ought
to be easier to stomach. China will both
pay a price and reap dividends. 7

Islamic ﬁnance

Sukuk and see

Doctrinal arguments threaten the
future of the Islamic-bond market
STOCKMARKETS in the Gulf do not ob-
serve Christian holidays, but still had a
generally quiet day on December 25th.
Shares in Dana Gas, an exploration busi-
ness listed in Abu Dhabi, however, did
make some noise, leaping by 13.2% on
Christmas Day, to complete a buoyant six
months for the stock (see chart). The surge
may owe something to the company’s re-
cent arbitration victory against the region-
al government of Iraqi Kurdistan, over
$2bn it and its consortium partners are
owed in overdue payments. But it also
hints at shareholders’ belief that Dana will
not be forced soon to satisfy its own credi-
tors. They have been up in arms since the
ﬁrm refused to honour a $700m Islamic
bond, or sukuk, that matured in October.
Dana says it has received legal advice
that the security no longer complies with
sharia, the body of Koranic law, and so the
bond is “unlawful” in the United Arab
Emirates (UAE). In July, facing liquidity dif-

ﬁculties, it stopped redeeming coupons (to
“distribute proﬁts”—the sukuk equivalent
of interest payments). In November a Brit-
ish court ruled that the company had to
pay. The judges said that, because the bond
was issued under English law, it had to be
viewed on its merits under that law alone.
The risk of non-compliance in the UAE,
they argued, must fall squarely on Dana. 
The Islamic-ﬁnance industry cheered
this ruling. Since sharia forbids the receipt
of interest, sukuk are backed by assets. In-
vestors get paid an agreed share of proﬁts,
before being returned the principal at ma-
turity. Yet there is a host of possible ar-
rangements, and no ﬁnal authority for de-
ciding which bonds are sharia-compliant.
Issuers instead rely on the opinions of
scholars, who do not always agree. Dana’s
refusal to pay had led investors to fear
struggling issuers would start using such
squabbles as an excuse to renege on dues.
After the ruling the industry feels “70%
comfortable”, says Mohammed Khnifer of
the Islamic Development Bank, a multilat-
eral lender based in Saudi Arabia.
The victory, however, may prove pyr-
rhic. To get hold of Dana’s domestic assets,
creditors need a new ruling from the UAE
courts. The outcome is unpredictable. A
ﬁrst hearing on the legality of the transac-
tion was due to be held on December 25th
itself, but adjourned until May. Seizing
Dana’s overseas assets, located in Egypt,
Kurdistan and Bahrain, may be just as hard.
Egypt is locked in a legal dispute with the
company. Iraq and Bahrain are not known
as easy places to enforce court rulings.
Time is on Dana’s side. The company
has said it will appeal against the British
judgment. The losing party in the UAE rul-
ing, whenever that comes, will probably
do the same. Proceedings could thus take
years. The legal fees incurred by the credi-
tors, led by BlackRock and Goldman Sachs,
will soon mount. Stuart Ure of Cliﬀord
Chance, a law ﬁrm, suspects sukuk holders
will eventually be forced to the negotiating
table. Precedent suggests they will proba-
bly have to accept some loss on the bond’s
face value. The fear among analysts in the
UAE is that if other delinquent issuers start

Bond bounce

Januar y 2nd 2017=100

Dana Gas share pr ice

Abu Dhabi
Secur ities Exchange

J

F M A M J

J

A S O N D

J

2017

2018

Sources: Bloomberg; Thomson Reuters

160

140

120

100

80

60

Finance and economics 53

using Islamic and local law as a “shield”
the whole sukuk market might shrivel. 
For now, overall demand for sukuk re-
mains strong. But appetite for non-rated or
sub-investment-grade issuers in emerging
markets could easily weaken. In recent
months, the industry has reacted to the
Dana case by tightening the language of su-
kuk contracts, notably through clauses that
waive borrowers’ rights to challenge an ar-
rangement’s sharia compliance. David
Miles of Covington & Burling, a law ﬁrm,
welcomes such provisions, but says they
do not solve the enforcement problem.
Nor will it be possible for all new sukuk to
be governed solely by English law. Some
will be backed by tangible assets, such as
property, located in other jurisdictions.
The Dana saga is a reminder not just that Is-
lamic ﬁnance still lacks shared standards,
but also that court judgments help credi-
tors only when they are enforceable. 7

Amer ican banks and tax reform

Deferred
gratiﬁcation

Despite immediate accounting losses,
tax cuts should beneﬁt banks
WHEN Donald Trump won America’s
presidential election 14 months ago,
banks’ share prices leapt. One reason for
that was the prospect of lower corporate
taxes, which would both beneﬁt banks di-
rectly and (investors hoped) ginger up the
economy. Like Mr Trump’s legislative agen-
da, their shares were becalmed for much
of 2017, but they perked up late in the year
when the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act looked
likely to become law—as it duly did when
the president signed it on December 22nd.
Yet several banks expect the act to make
deep dents in fourth-quarter proﬁts. On
December 28th Goldman Sachs said it was
braced for a $5bn hit. A week before, Bank
of America (BofA) announced a $3bn
write-down. Early in the month, on fairly
accurate assumptions about the law’s ﬁnal
form, Citigroup put the cost at a whopping
$20bn. Foreign banks are also assessing
the damage: £1bn ($1.4bn), says Barclays;
SFr2.3bn ($2.4bn), reckons Credit Suisse.
These one-oﬀ hits have two main
causes. First, many banks carry “deferred
tax assets” (DTAs) on their balance-sheets,
largely past losses—a legacy, for many, of
the ﬁnancial crisis—carried forward to set
against future taxes. The higher the tax rate,
the more these assets are worth. So the
new law, by cutting the federal corporate-
tax rate from 35% to 21%, slashes their value.
Citigroup, with $43.2bn of American DTAs
on the books, and BofA, with $7bn, accord-
ing to Mike Mayo of Wells Fargo, have the 

1

54 Finance and economics

2 biggest piles. Reduced DTAs account for the
bulk of their write-downs, as well as for
those at Barclays and Credit Suisse.
Second, cash repatriated from abroad
will be taxed at 15.5%—below the main rate,
giving banks an incentive to bring it home.
This accounts for around two-thirds of
Goldman’s $5bn; JPMorgan Chase has said
repatriation could cost up to $2bn. Foreign
banks face a further niggle: the law taxes
payments from American entities to for-
eign aﬃliates—a measure called the base
erosion and anti-abuse tax, or BEAT. Credit
Suisse says it is “likely to be aﬀected” by
BEAT; Barclays thinks negative eﬀects are
“possible”. Neither has named a ﬁgure.
Though banks expect the biggest blows,
they are not alone. BP and Royal Dutch
Shell have announced DTA write-downs
too. (Some companies, notably Berkshire
Hathaway, have deferred tax liabilities, so
should get a ﬁllip.) Plenty more American

ﬁrms have billions stashed abroad. 
Still, the short-term damage is not as
bad as it looks. Because supervisors largely
disregard DTAs anyway, Citigroup expects
its main regulatory measure of capital to
fall by only $4bn, from $162bn. And look-
ing ahead, the tax cut should indeed be a
boon. Mr Mayo says that American banks’
eﬀective tax rate in the ﬁrst half of 2017 was
31% (including state levies); that may fall by
around eight points. Granted, some gains
may be passed on to customers; and, un-
der the new law, big banks’ deposit-insur-
ance premiums are no longer tax-deduct-
ible. Even so, Mr Mayo expects earnings
per share to rise by 5-10%.
Regional lenders, with little business
abroad, should gain more than Wall Street
ﬁrms. They also have lower DTAs, mean-
ing less pain now. But big banks, despite
the chunky write-downs, should beneﬁt
too. Dry those tears. 7

MiFID 2

Day zero

Sprawling new European ﬁnancial regulations enter into force at last
AFTER years of rule-drafting, industry
lobbying and plenty of last-minute
wrangling, Europe’s massive new ﬁnancial
regulation, MiFID 2, was rolled out on Jan-
uary 3rd. Firms had spent months dreading
(in some cases) or eagerly awaiting (in oth-
ers) the “day of the MiFID” when the law’s
new reporting requirements would enter
into force. One electronic-trading platform,
Tradeweb, even gave its clients a “MiFID
clock” to count down to it. 
Apprehension was understandable.
The new EU law, the second iteration of the
Markets in Financial Instruments Directive
(its full, unwieldy name), aﬀects markets in

everything from shares to bonds to deriva-
tives. It seeks to open up opaque markets
by forcing brokers and trading venues to re-
port prices publicly, in close to real time for
those assets deemed liquid. It also requires
them to report to regulators up to 65 sepa-
rate data points on every trade, with the
aim of avoiding market abuse. 
The changes are greatest for markets,
like those in bonds and derivatives, that
are now largely conducted “over the coun-
ter” (ie, not on exchanges). But the law also
restricts share trading in “dark pools”
closed to retail investors, provides for ac-
cess to European markets for non-EU ﬁrms,

The Economist Januar y 6th 2018

and requires investment banks to start
charging separately for research, among
myriad other provisions. It is perhaps the
biggest regulatory change to European ﬁ-
nancial markets since the ﬁnancial crisis. 
For all the jitters, the ﬁrst hours of trad-
ing under the new regime went fairly
smoothly, though trading volumes were
lower than usual. Financial ﬁrms had col-
lectively spent $2.1bn preparing for MiFID 2
in 2017 alone, according to one estimate by
Expand, part of the Boston Consulting
Group, and IHS Markit, a data provider. 
Some banks had people up all the night
before the 3rd. The preparations paid oﬀ.
But regulatory reprieves also helped. In
late December the European Securities
and Markets Authority (ESMA), an EU regu-
lator, granted a six-month reprieve from
the requirement that every counterparty
to a trade must have a “legal-entity identiﬁ-
er”, a unique number, after many ﬁrms
failed to obtain these in time. It also let trad-
ing continue across the EU even though 17
of its members had not yet fully tran-
sposed the rules into national law. And
ESMA clariﬁed that trading on non-EU ven-
ues could continue while it ﬁnishes its as-
sessment of which jurisdictions will be
deemed “equivalent”. This avoided a
worst-case scenario, in which European
traders suddenly lost access to the New
York Stock Exchange, say, or the Chicago
Mercantile Exchange.
Early on January 3rd itself, Germany’s
and Britain’s regulators allowed three large
futures
exchanges—Eurex Clearing
in
Frankfurt, and ICE Futures Europe and the
London Metal Exchange in Britain—to de-
lay implementation of “open access” pro-
visions until mid-2020. These rules, di-
vorcing the execution of futures contracts
from the clearing of them (they now occur
at the same exchange), were contentious
when passed, with Britain reportedly a
strong proponent and Germany staunchly
opposed. A London lawyer thinks the long
delay, to past the date in 2019 when Britain
is to leave the EU, may well mean these
provisions “never see the light of day”.
Signiﬁcant as they may be for parts of
the market, such reprieves do not amount
to a delay of the overall law, says Jonathan
Herbst of Norton Rose Fulbright, a law
ﬁrm. Nonetheless, a disaster-free imple-
mentation day does not mean the end of
the worries. As Enrico Bruni of Tradeweb
points out, market participants will adjust
their trading patterns over time, and
emerging problems will need to be re-
solved. It will take even longer to see if the
structural changes the new framework is
forecast to encourage—such as consolida-
tion among brokers or asset managers—
materialise. And the law may yet play a
role in the Brexit negotiations. Its rules on
ﬁnancial-market access for third countries,
after all, will apply to Britain. There are
many more days of the MiFID to come. 7

The Economist Januar y 6th 2018 

Finance and economics 55

Free exchange

Many happy returns

A new data trove helps reshape how the economy is understood
DATA-GATHERING is the least sexy part of economics, which
is saying something. Yet it is also among the most important.
The discipline is rife with elaborate theories built on assump-
tions that turned out to be false once someone took the time to
pull together the relevant data. Accordingly, one of the most valu-
able papers produced in 2017 is an epic example of data-retrieval:
a piece of research that spells out the rates of return on important
asset classes, for 16 advanced economies, from 1870 to 2015. It is
fascinating work, a rich seam for other economists to mine, and a
source of insight into some of today’s great economic debates.
Rates of return both inﬂuence and are inﬂuenced by the way
ﬁrms and households expect the future to unfold. They therefore
ﬁnd their way into all sorts of economic models. Yet data on asset
returns are incomplete. The new research, published as an NBER
working paper in December 2017, ﬁlls in quite a few gaps. It is the
work of ﬁve economists: Òscar Jordà of the San Francisco Fed,
Katharina Knoll of the Bundesbank, Alan Taylor of the University
of California, Davis, and Dmitry Kuvshinov and Moritz Schular-
ick, both of the University of Bonn. (Messrs Jordà, Schularick and
Taylor have spent years building a massive collection of histori-
cal macroeconomic and ﬁnancial data.) For each of the 16 econo-
mies, they craft long-term series showing annual real rates of re-
turn—taking into account both investment income, such as
dividends, and capital gains, all net of inﬂation—for government
bonds and short-term bills, equities and housing. Theirs is the
ﬁrst such data set to gather all of that information for so many
countries over so long a period.
As such, the authors establish some new basic economic facts.
They conclude, for instance, that over the very long run it is hous-
ing, rather than equities, which provides the best return (see
chart): both asset types have yielded about 7% a year on average
over the 145 years, but equity returns are much more volatile. It is
important to note that, though homeowners might cheer this
news, it is not necessarily a reason to leap into the housing mar-
ket. Rental yields account for about half of the long-run return on
housing, and owning a diversiﬁed portfolio of rent-yielding prop-
erty is not the same bet as borrowing to house the family. 

The new old normal
Besides oﬀering these baseline ﬁndings, the authors’ work helps
to answer several pressing economic questions. One example is
the puzzle of declining interest rates. The falling rates of the past
few decades distress some economists, who worry they betoken
weak growth and complicate central bankers’ ability to manage
the economy. Yet the long-run data reveal that the high rates of re-
turn on government debt seen in the 1980s were an anomaly. The
real return on bonds and short-term bills is normally relatively
low—and can even be negative for long periods of time—as some
other economists (such as Carmen Reinhart of Harvard Universi-
ty and Belen Sbrancia of the IMF) have also found. Recent de-
clines therefore represent a return to more typical conditions. 
That, in turn, suggests that central bankers who hope to “nor-
malise” interest rates may be in for a rude surprise. But low rates
of return also mean that government-debt burdens may prove
easier to manage than thought—and perhaps that government
borrowing could be used more aggressively in times of economic
weakness to make up for central-bank impotence. Nor do low
rates of return on government debt imply that the world is enter-
ing a period of “secular stagnation”, or chronically weak growth.
Low rates have in the past been as much a feature of rip-roaring

Home economics

Annual global rates of return* 

Ten-year mov ing average†, %

By asset, 1870-2015, %

0

2

4

6

8

Annual rate of return,
all asset types

Housing

Equities

Bonds

Bills

GDP growth

1870 1900

50

2010

10

8

6

4

2

+

0

–

2

Source: National Bureau of Economic Research

*16 countr ies unweighted
†16 countr ies weighted by GDP

economies—eg, in the 1950s and 1960s—as of the more stagnant
ones experienced recently.
More bracing still are the data’s implications for debates on in-
equality. Karl Marx once reasoned that as capitalists piled up
wealth, their investments would suﬀer diminishing returns and
the pay-oﬀ from them would drop towards zero, eventually pro-
voking destructive ﬁghts between industrial countries. That
seems not to be true; returns on housing and equities remain high
even though the stock of assets as a share of GDP has doubled
since 1970. Gravity-defying returns might reﬂect new and produc-
tive uses for capital: ﬁrms deploying machines instead of people,
for instance, or well-capitalised companies with relatively small
numbers of employees taking over growing swathes of the econ-
omy. High returns on equity capital may therefore be linked to a
more tenuous status for workers and to a drop in the share of GDP
which is paid out as labour income.
Similarly, long-run returns provide support for the grand the-
ory of inequality set out in 2013 by Thomas Piketty, a French econ-
omist, who suggested (based in part on his own data-gathering)
that the rate of return on capital was typically higher than the
growth rate of the economy. As a consequence, the stock of
wealth should grow over time relative to GDP. And because
wealth is less evenly distributed than income, this growth should
push the economy towards ever higher levels of inequality. Mr Pi-
ketty summed up this contention in the pithy expression “r > g”.
In fact, that may understate the case, according to the newly
gathered ﬁgures. In most times and places, “r”, which the authors
calculate as the average return across all assets, both safe and
risky, is well above “g” or GDP growth. Since 1870, they reckon, the
average real return on wealth has been about 6% a year whereas
real GDP growth has been roughly 3% a year on average. Only
during the ﬁrst and second world wars did rates of return drop
much below growth rates. And in recent decades, the “great com-
pression” in incomes and wealth that followed the world wars
has come undone, as asset returns persistently outstrip the
growth of the economy.
In such ways does the painstaking collection of data funda-
mentally reshape understanding of the way economies work. It is
a shame that data-gathering does not carry higher status within
the profession. It would raise the status of economics itself. 7

Economist.com/blogs/freeexchange

56

Science and technology

The Economist Januar y 6th 2018

Also in this section
57 Digital assistants can be too human
58 Cleaning up space debr is

The search for MH370

Many scanners, very deep

D u r b a n

A swarm of autonomous submarines launched from a fantastical mother ship is
out to ﬁnd a missing airliner
ON JANUARY 2nd, at 8pm local time, a
strange vessel cast oﬀ and sailed out
of the Port of Durban, in South Africa,
heading east. Her hull was orange. Her su-
perstructure bristled with antennae—
some long and pointy, some sleek, white
and domed. Her stern sported a crane and
also a strange gantry, known to her crew as
the “stinger”. Her bow looked so huge and
ungainly as to be on the point of tipping
her, nose ﬁrst, into the depths. And below
deck, invisible to those on shore, she car-
ried eight autonomous submarines called
HUGINs, each six metres long, weighing
1,800kg, and containing a titanium sphere
to protect the sensitive electronics therein
from the pressure of the ocean’s depths.
The strange ship’s name is Seabed Con-
structor. She is a Norwegian research ves-
sel, built in 2014 and owned by Swire Sea-
bed, a dredging and surveying ﬁrm in
Bergen. At the moment, though, she is
leased to Ocean Inﬁnity, a company based
in Houston, Texas. And the task Ocean In-
ﬁnity has hired her for is a hard one: to ﬁnd
whatever is left of ﬂight MH370, a Boeing
777-200ER that
left Kuala Lumpur on
March 8th 2014 with 239 people on board
and vanished over the Indian Ocean. 
The disappearance of MH370 is one of
the great mysteries of modern civil avia-
tion. The aircraft was bound for Beijing, but
changed course suddenly over the South
China Sea and broke oﬀ radio contact. It
was last detected by radar near the north-

ern tip of Sumatra, heading west-north-
west into the open ocean. Subsequent
transmissions to a communications satel-
lite suggested that it crashed somewhere
along an arc between 1,500km and
2,700km west of Australia.
The search that followed was the larg-
est in aviation history. It was mounted by
Fugro, a Dutch ﬁrm, and paid for by the Ma-
laysian, Chinese and Australian govern-
ments. Over the course of three years Fu-
gro managed to scan 120,000 square
kilometres of seabed. But it found nothing.
The plan is for Ocean Inﬁnity’s search to be
paid for, on a “no ﬁnd, no fee” basis, by Ma-
laysia alone. Contracts have yet to be
signed, but Oliver Plunkett, Ocean Inﬁn-
ity’s boss, has decided to go ahead anyway,
to take advantage of the window of good
weather that opens in the southern Indian
Ocean in January and February. 
Ocean Inﬁnity aims to cover the ground
much faster than Fugro did. In prior cruises
in the Atlantic, the ﬁrm has, according to
Josh Broussard, its technical director, man-
aged to scan 890 square kilometres a day
using six autonomous submarines. With
eight, Mr Broussard thinks that the new
mission will be able to manage 1,200 a
day—enough to have covered the original
search area in just 100 days.
The new search area, 25,000 square ki-
lometres of sea ﬂoor chosen by investiga-
tors from the Australian Transport Safety
Bureau (ATSB), is just north of the old one

For daily analysis and debate on science and
technology, visit
Economist.com/science

(see map on next page). Fugro could infer
MH370’s crash site only from its ﬁnal, rath-
er shaky, satellite signals. Ocean Inﬁnity’s
eﬀort has been guided as well by wreckage
washed ashore on the coasts of Africa and
several islands in the Indian Ocean—hence
the more northerly starting point. Seabed
Constructor will reach that starting-point,
which is about 35°S, and 2,200km oﬀ the
coast of Western Australia, on or about Jan-
uary 17th, her crew having conducted a few
ﬁnal tests and calibrations of the HUGIN
system en route, using remote-controlled
robots to place dummy debris on the sea
ﬂoor in order to see if the subs can ﬁnd it. If
searching the patch of ocean designated by
the ATSB reveals nothing, then the ship
will head farther north, towards the 30th
parallel, which some independent experts
believe is a better bet.

An ocean of interest
Fugro’s search used but a single autono-
mous submarine, and this was unable to
dive below 4,000 metres, meaning it was
not always close to the seabed. The HU-
GINs carried by Seabed Constructor can,
however, go as deep as 6,000 metres. That
permits them to reach most of the sea ﬂoor
comfortably. And the fact that there are
eight of them means diﬀerent areas can be
searched in parallel, and that some subma-
rines will always be at sea.

1

The Richard Casement internship

We invite applications for the 2018 Richard Casement
internship. We are looking for a would-be journalist to
spend three months of the summer working on the
newspaper in London, wr iting about science and
technology. Applicants should wr ite a letter introducing
themselves and an ar ticle of about 600 words that they
think would be suitable for publication in the Science
and Technology section. They should be prepared to
come for an inter view in London or New York. A stipend
of £2,000 a month will be paid to the successful
candidate. Applications must reach us by Januar y 26th.
These should be sent to: casement2018@economist.com

The Economist Januar y 6th 2018 

T A N Z A N I A

Wing
flap

E

U
BIQ
Hor izontal
stabiliser

MOZAM

S O U T H
A F R I C A

Flap track
far ing

Durban

Engine cowling

A
G
A
D
A

M

R
A
C
S

Réunion

(To France)

Flaperon

Cabin
inter ior
panel

Unconf irmed
debr is

I N D I A N O C E A N

1,500 km

45°E

60°E

75°E

90°E

Last
militar y-
radar
contact

Kuala
Lumpur

Last civilian-
radar contact

MALAYSIA

I N D O N E S I A

I N D O N E S I A

15°S

MH370 known
flight path

AUSTRALIA

AU S TRA L IA

30°S

Approximate search area

Covered
MH370 debr is

Expanded

Science and technology 57

those aboard it will doubtless derive relief
from knowing where the ﬂight ended up.
But merely ﬁnding the wreckage will not
explain what happened on board the
plane. That will require the discovery of
the aircraft’s ﬂight recorder.
That object is therefore Ocean Inﬁnity’s
ultimate target. If it is found on this mis-
sion, Mr Broussard says the ﬁrm plans to
bring it to the surface and then deliver it for
analysis to the Australian authorities, who
have the technical competence to assess it.
A follow-up trip to examine the wreckage,
and even bring it to the surface, would re-
quire further authorisation from the Ma-
laysian government. 
Seabed Constructor is the most ad-
vanced civilian survey vessel on the planet
today. If its array of technology cannot ﬁnd
MH370, then it is likely that nothing will,
and that the mystery of MH370 will remain
unsolved. Either way, though, the advance
of technology may mean that it is the last
such mystery. As the oceans are watched
with ever closer scrutiny, from space and
the depths, it is increasingly diﬃcult for
anything to get lost in the ﬁrst place. 7

will be examined by three sets of human
eyes. Together, this survey team will come
up with a list of possible targets, ranked
from “E” to “A” (“nothing” to “that’s it”), to
present to their bosses. If the data look
good, a HUGIN will be sent down for a sec-
ond, closer look, cameras at the ready. 
What happens next, if Ocean Inﬁnity
does locate what is left of the missing air-
craft, is unclear. Friends and relatives of

Digital assistants

Losing face

2

The HUGINs will be launched by the
stinger, which extends out over the ship’s
stern. Once underwater, the robot craft
will communicate with the ship using an
acoustic modem. The ship’s own modem,
which will receive these signals, is ﬁxed to
the end of a long pole that extends down
through her hull into the water. 
Each HUGIN comes with a 300kg lithi-
um-polymer battery pack, good for a tour
of duty lasting up to 60 hours. A down-
ward-pointing sonar will map the con-
tours of the seabed beneath the craft, but
most of the searching will be done by side-
mounted sonars scanning the bed on ei-
ther side of the craft. These send out pings
and measure the intensity with which
they are reﬂected. Sand reﬂects less sound
than metal does, meaning metal objects
such as aircraft debris are easy to distin-
guish. And if something apparently metal-
lic is detected, its nature can be conﬁrmed
using an on-board magnetometer.
The HUGINs’ search patterns are set by
people, but the craft will actually navigate
with little reference to their mother ship.
Every so often, the ship will send out a cor-
rective ping to keep them on course. Most-
ly, however, they will employ dead reckon-
ing, based on data from accelerometers, to
steer themselves autonomously. They are
also capable of picking their way without
assistance over sheer underwater cliﬀs and
mountains, and past crevices and gullies,
using on-board cameras and machine-vi-
sion software. 
After its tour of duty, a HUGIN will be
lifted back on-board ship and the data it
has collected (up to two terabytes, record-
ed on a waterproof hard drive) down-
loaded into the ship’s data centre and
turned into human-readable maps, a pro-
cess that takes six hours. The HUGIN’s bat-
tery will be replaced with a fully charged
one, any necessary repairs made, and the
craft then sent back out into the ocean. 
A team of geologists and hydrographers
will then pore over the maps, looking for
signs of the missing plane. Surprisingly, for
such a high-tech operation, this stage of the
search will be entirely manual. Every
block of sea ﬂoor that the HUGINs map

Sometimes, computer programs seem too human for their own good
DIGITAL assistants such as Siri and Cor-
tana are increasingly common on
phones and computers. Most are designed
to give their users the impression that a hu-
manlike intelligence lies behind the pro-
gram’s friendly voice. It does not, of course.
But dozens of experiments over the years
have shown that people readily build
strong bonds with computerised helpers
which are endowed with anthropomor-
phic features, whether visual or vocal.
Developing an emotional relationship
with a piece of software can, however, cut
both ways. As a study published in Psycho-
logical Science by Park Daeun, of Chung-
buk National University in South Korea,
and her colleagues, shows, one emotion
sometimes involved in machine-human
interaction is embarrassment. This, Dr Park
has discovered, makes some users reluc-
tant to ask for help from their artiﬁcially in-
telligent pals. Apparently, they are sheep-
ish about doing so.
Dr Park and her team recruited 187 par-
ticipants into their study. To start with each
was presented with a series of statements
on the malleability of intelligence. These
included, “you have a certain amount of
intelligence, and you can’t really do much
to change it”, and “you can always sub-

stantially change how intelligent you are”.
Participants rated their responses to these
statements on a six-point scale, on which
one meant “strongly disagree” and six
meant “strongly agree”. The reason for this
initial test was that Dr Park knew from pre-
vious work that, in academic settings,
those who believe intelligence to be mal-
leable are comfortable asking for assis-
tance while those who believe it to be ﬁxed
often feel ashamed to do so.
The initial test done, the researchers
presented their volunteers with a second,
which involved looking at 16 sets of three
words and trying to think of a fourth word
that linked them. For example, when of-
fered “room, blood, salts” a correct answer
would be “bath”. Sometimes the ﬁrst three
words were accompanied by an unre-
quested hint (in the example given, this
was “tub”). Sometimes they were not. 
Hints appeared as the written form of
the word in question, accompanied by a
computer-shaped icon. For half of partici-
pants this icon had a humanlike face, and
the hint was placed inside a speech bubble
originating from that face, thus anthropo-
morphising the presentation to some de-
gree. For the other half the icon lacked a
face and there was no speech bubble. After 

1

58 Science and technology

2 the ﬁnal set of words had been displayed,
participants were asked to agree or dis-
agree with follow-up statements about
their experience, such as “it was embar-
rassing to receive help during the task”, and
“others might think I am incompetent be-
cause I received help during the task”. This
time, they quantiﬁed their feelings on a
seven-point scale, with higher scores rep-
resenting greater feelings of unease.
The researchers found that participants
who believed intelligence to be unchange-
able felt more embarrassed and more in-
competent after the tests. Speciﬁcally,
those whose level of belief that this is true
was more than one standard deviation
above the mean score on the six-point
scale for perceptions of intelligence ﬂexi-
bility (in other words, the top sixth of the
sample), averaged 3.2 when measured for

feelings of shame and embarrassment if
the computer icons they had seen giving
the hints had had faces and speech bub-
bles, but only 2.7 if not. In contrast, people
who strongly believed that intelligence
could be changed over time (the bottom
sixth of the sample) felt the same level of
discomfort (around 2.5) whether or not the
icons had been anthropomorphised. 
A second experiment, in which a diﬀer-
ent set of participants were allowed to ask
for help rather than having it thrust upon
them at random had similar results. Dr
Park therefore concludes that some people
do, indeed, seem to wish to avoid losing
face by seeking help from an icon that has,
well, a face. And that in turn suggests there
are circumstances when the relentless
pseudo-humanisation of machine-human
interactions could usefully be curbed. 7

Space debr is

Junk hunting

A new satellite will test ways to capture detritus circling Earth
THERE is an awful lot of junk in space.
The latest data from the European
Space Agency suggest some 7,500 tonnes
of it now orbits Earth. It ranges from de-
funct satellites and rocket parts to nuts,
bolts, shards of metal and even ﬂecks of
paint. But something as small as a paint
ﬂeck can still do serious damage if it hits a
working satellite at a speed of several thou-
sand kilometres an hour. There have al-
ready been more than 290 collisions,
break-ups and explosions in space. Given
the likelihood that thousands of small sat-
ellites, some only a few centimetres across,

will be launched over the next decade,
many worry that large volumes of space
near Earth will soon be rendered risky
places for satellites (especially big, expen-
sive ones) to be.
What is needed, then, is a clean-up. Va-
rious ideas about how to do this have been
proposed, and some are about to be put to
the test. In February a resupply mission to
the International Space Station will also
carry a satellite, about the size of a domes-
tic washing machine, called Remove-
DEBRIS. Once this has been unpacked and
prepared by the station’s crew, they will

The Economist Januar y 6th 2018

use a robotic manipulator to send it on its
way into orbit around Earth.
RemoveDEBRIS has been designed and
built by Surrey Satellite Technology, a Brit-
ish manufacturer of small satellites spun
out of the University of Surrey in 1985,
which is now majority-owned by Airbus.
Mission Control for the RemoveDEBRIS
project is the Surrey Space Centre at the
university. The plan is for RemoveDEBRIS
to carry out four experiments. The ﬁrst two
will involve launching from it a pair of
CubeSats (mini-satellites 10cm across).
These will play the role of space junk. 
Once launched, the ﬁrst CubeSat will
inﬂate a balloonlike structure a metre
across, to which it will remain attached, in
order to create a bigger target. The mother
ship will then approach to a distance of
seven metres and ﬁre a net at the balloon.
This net is designed to unfurl and warp it-
self around the target. Once the target is en-
tangled, a cable connecting the net to the
mother ship will be tightened, closing the
neck of the net. It will then be hauled in,
like catching ﬁsh. 
The second CubeSat will test the sen-
sors of RemoveDEBRIS. This trial will use
cameras and a lidar (an optical version of
radar) aboard the mother ship to build up a
detailed three-dimensional image of the
object. If that works it will permit future
clean-up vehicles to recognise what they
are dealing with, and react appropriately. 
In the third experiment, Remove-
DEBRIS will extend a 1.5-metre-long arm
that holds a 10cm-square target. It will then
ﬁre a harpoon at the target. The idea is that
harpoons could be used to pierce some
items of space debris and, like the net in the
ﬁrst experiment, then haul them in. The ﬁ-
nal experiment is intended to ensure that
RemoveDEBRIS and its captured items do
not themselves become space junk. The
mother ship will deploy a ten square-me-
tre plastic membrane, supported by four
carbon-ﬁbre booms, to act as a “dragsail”
that will employ the limited atmosphere at
this altitude to pull the craft downward to
the ﬁery death of re-entry. 
If space-debris capture systems like this
succeed, then future missions could start to
go after some of the most worrying bits of
junk. Such ventures could be commercial,
according to Guglielmo Aglietti, director of
the Surrey Space Centre, if governments
(probably acting collectively) were willing
to pay to keep space clean so as not to dam-
age their own activities and those of their
citizens. There are already guidelines to try
to limit the accumulation of space junk.
Defunct satellites should be disposed of
within 25 years, either by being tipped into
re-entry or parked in an out-of-the way
“graveyard” orbit. But the rules are not al-
ways followed and a lot of older debris re-
mains in orbit. A bounty on removing the
most threatening hulks might even see the
launch of a new space business. 7

Books and arts

The Economist Januar y 6th 2018 59

Also in this section
60 Economics and dieting
60 Br itain’s universities?
61 Japanese drumming
61 Chloe Benjamin’s ﬁction
62 Johnson: making new words

For daily analysis and debate on books, ar ts and
culture, visit
Economist.com/culture

show like a circus ringmaster, ramping up
the tension by calling for lunch just as
things literally heated up. 
David Schwartz, the author of “The Last
Man Who Knew Everything”, is the son of
another Nobel-winning physicist. His fa-
ther left some intriguing correspondence
on Fermi, which inspired Mr Schwartz to
learn more. He interviewed many of Fer-
mi’s students and colleagues, shedding
light also on Fermi the educator (his lec-
tures were so renowned that even notes
taken by his assistants were a bestseller). 
Mr Schwartz deftly conveys the aesthet-
ic beauty of Fermi’s insights without
getting mired in their minutiae. His book
includes only enough scientiﬁc detail to 
explain each discovery as it happened. 
Fermi is depicted as a natural leader—in the
laboratory, on hiking trails near his work-
places in Rome and New Mexico, and in
the square-dances he came to love in
America. Yet for all his gregariousness Fer-
mi tended to reveal little of his emotions in
conversations or correspondence, even as
he worked on the team to develop human-
ity’s most terrible weapons. Laura, his
wife, did not know until after the bombs
fell just what her husband had really been
up to in his laboratory.
As a result, Mr Schwartz tussles with
many of the same questions that have
dogged previous Fermi biographers. Did
he stay so long in Italy, joining Benito Mus-
solini’s vaunted Accademia d’Italia, just for
the funds and freedom to pursue his pre-
cious research? Did he participate in the
Manhattan Project out of patriotism for his
adopted country, or was he dragged along
because of his expertise in nuclear phys-
ics? Or was he just insatiably curious about
whether the bomb could indeed be made? 
It would be easy to depict Fermi as a 

1

Histor y of physics

Clever calculator

The Last Man Who Knew Ever ything: The
Life and Times of Enr ico Fermi, Father
of the Nuclear Age. By David Schwar tz.

Basic Books; 451 pages; $35 and £27.99

Enrico Fermi, champion nuclear researcher, mathematician and educator
JUST before daybreak on July 16th 1945 
Enrico Fermi lay down in the open desert
of New Mexico. At 05:30, the world’s ﬁrst
nuclear explosion took place ten miles
(16km) away. He counted oﬀ the seconds
after the ﬂash, anticipating the arrival of
the blast-wave. With preternatural calm,
Fermi stood up and let some strips of pa-
per ﬂutter away as the wave passed. They
ﬂew about eight feet. The Trinity nuclear
test, he pronounced after making some
quick calculations, had released the equiv-
alent of about 10 kilotonnes of TNT. 
Fermi was, by that stage, already a 
celebrity among physicists. An obvious
mathematics prodigy as a child in Italy, he
had devoured texts written for adults.
Throughout his life he kept few books, 
preferring to derive conclusions from ﬁrst
principles whenever he felt the need. 
As he took up diﬀerent posts in academ-
ic research in Italy and abroad, Fermi
showed himself to be not only a theorist
with unparalleled insight but also adept as
an experimentalist (a rare combination)
across every kind of physics. He had an un-
canny knack for rough-and-ready calcula-
tions to obtain approximate answers for
damnably diﬃcult questions (the Trinity
bomb, later analysis revealed, released 18
kilotonnes of TNT, which was surprisingly
close to Fermi’s desert estimation). 
He eschewed complexity, preferring to

tackle only a problem’s essentials, discard
any distracting elements and ruthlessly
squeeze what remained. Such back-of-the-
envelope calculations, which became
known as “Fermi problems”, were such
good examples of critical thinking that re-
cruiters nowadays test applicants’ mettle
by setting them as interview questions.
Fermi’s solutions were so often right that
his colleagues in Rome called him “the
pope”. His boss recognised that he could
help raise the reputation of Italian science.
Fermi’s discovery of how slow-moving
neutrons helped to make some atoms
radioactive won him the Nobel prize in
1938. He used the trip to Stockholm to 
abscond with his family from his increas-
ingly fascist homeland. Once in America
he became involved in the Manhattan Pro-
ject, which led to the ﬁrst nuclear bomb,
bringing him renown well beyond the
physics community.
Fermi was an inveterate showman. In
Chicago, on the day he demonstrated the
world’s ﬁrst controlled nuclear chain reac-
tion—a prerequisite for the uncontrolled
kind in a nuclear weapon—he ran the

60 Books and arts

The Economist Januar y 6th 2018

2 standard reticent genius who solved every
problem as if he had, as one student put it,
“an inside track to God”. But Mr Schwartz’s
sleuthing also reveals how science works
in its proper context: how each ﬁnding
builds on the last; how identical ideas can
occur to more than one person when the
intellectual conditions are right; how an in-
sight into nature arises not from a vacuum
but from hard-won experience and, usual-
ly, some clever calculating.
Fermi was once described by a student
as the last man who knew everything. He
went on to make important discoveries in
particle physics, geophysics and even the
science of the stars. And he never stopped
calculating. Even on his deathbed, he used
a stopwatch to determine exactly how
much ﬂuid he was receiving from his intra-
venous drip. It was a simple problem, real-
ly, if you focused on the essentials. 7

Economics and dieting

Quantitative eating

University education

Three years and
score

A University Education. By David Willetts.

Oxford University Press; 432 pages; $32.50
and £25
IN 1945 there were 500 universities across
the globe. Today there are more than
10,000. As universities continue to dis-
place apprenticeships and the armed
forces as the main path to adulthood in the
rich world, scrutiny of higher education
has increased. In England critics see uni-
versities as hotbeds of anti-Brexit provoca-
tion and places where censorious students 
stiﬂe debate. Complaints about hefty fees

The Economists’ Diet: The Surpr ising
Formula for Losing Weight and Keeping It

Oﬀ. By Chr istopher Payne and Rob Barnett.
Touchstone; 288 pages; $25
DO YOU indulge in QE (quantitative
eating)? Do you have a high margin-
al propensity to consume chocolate?
Then you might be piqued by a diet book
from two self-described “formerly obese
economists” on how to lose weight.
To be honest, the economics within
this book is very much a side order rather
than the main course. A diet is described
as a “self-imposed eating-austerity pro-
gramme”. There is some discussion of
people’s general failure to give enough
weight to the long-term consequences of
their actions; a phenomenon known as
hyperbolic discounting. And there is
some neat use of the concept of diminish-
ing returns. Eat a wide variety of foods
and you may always get pleasure from
trying something diﬀerent. But limit your
diet and you will soon tire of eating more. 
But the “surprising formula” prom-
ised by the book is scarcely a shocker: eat
less. The authors think this is more im-
portant than exercise since the latter
tends to make you hungry; it is easy to
undo all the good work of a cycle ride
with a snack. 
Eating less requires you to conﬁne
yourself to one square meal (deﬁned as
some grilled meat and two side portions
of vegetables) a day. The other meals
should be very light; a non-creamy soup,
a salad or a bowl of non-sugary cereal. If
you do end up splurging on a big meal or

Elastic demand

a treat, then the other meals should be
skipped altogether.
But the authors are not too prescrip-
tive. The aim is to ﬁnd a diet that works
for each individual. And the best way of
achieving that is to weigh yourself every
day. Only then can you see whether the
diet is working. 
The book is full of perfectly sensible
advice, such as avoiding faddy diets, the
lure of “low-fat” foods and the tempta-
tion to drink all your calories in the form
of ﬁzzy drinks, alcohol and sugary cof-
fees. At nearly 300 pages, however, it is
rather repetitive. But, as experienced
economists, the authors may have real-
ised that, when it comes to diet plans,
demand is almost inﬁnite.

and lacklustre teaching are common.
David Willetts, Britain’s higher educa-
tion minister in the Conservative-Liberal
Democrat coalition and now a Tory peer,
argues against those who say the answer is
to turn the clock back by cutting student
numbers. “A University Education” is not
the mix of gossip and post hoc justiﬁcation
normally churned out by former ministers.
Instead, Lord Willetts provides something
more valuable: an examination of the state
of English universities, a defence of the 
value of a university education and an 
argument that the provision of higher edu-
cation should be expanded further.
This may seem curiously egalitarian
stuﬀ for a former Conservative minister.
Yet Lord Willetts views a university educa-
tion as akin to home ownership—both are
good for society and something that every
parent hopes their child will grow up to
possess. He cites evidence that graduates
are healthier, happier and less inclined to a
life of crime. He notes that the graduate
wage premium has held up even as the
number of students has grown. Attempts
by graduates to restrict access to university,
he writes, are little more than “educational
Nimbyism”.
As a minister Lord Willetts was best
known for nearly trebling tuition fees to
£9,000 ($14,000) a year in 2012. Some wor-
ried that this would dissuade poor pupils
from applying. However, thanks to gener-
ous government loans, their numbers con-
tinued to grow. In policy circles, the debate
has moved on to whether the new arrivals
beneﬁt from university study, which is of-
ten in less research-orientated institutions,
or whether the money would be better
spent on other forms of education. 
Here Lord Willetts is no less trenchant.
He argues that these institutions, which
tend to languish near the bottom of re-
search-focused league tables, simply per-
form a diﬀerent role. They may produce
few bankers, judges or Nobel prizewin-
ners, but that reﬂects their intake, rather
than poor tuition. They often add as much
value as more prestigious institutions. A re-
cent analysis of graduate salaries by The
Economist reached a similar conclusion.
Yet Lord Willetts is far from Panglossian.
He traces many ﬂaws in England’s system
to the gates of its grandest universities, Ox-
ford and Cambridge. In a brisk history, he
tells how, even as the university ﬂourished
in Europe, its spread was halted in England
by protective measures put in place at the
behest of Oxbridge. It was not until the cre-
ation of University College London in 1829
that England gained its third university, six
centuries after the second.
Oxbridge still provides the metric by
which other English universities are
judged. This leads to excellent research and
strong protection of institutional auto-
nomy. It also means universities draw their
students from across the country, control 

1

The Economist Januar y 6th 2018 

Books and arts 61

2 their own admissions procedures and
compete for the best students. Partly as a
result, getting into a prestigious university
just about guarantees the student a good
job, since mere entry is proof of academic
ability. Students thus may have less incen-
tive to work hard, writes Lord Willetts,
which allows universities to focus on 
research. And since universities have so
much sway over admissions, the school-
leaving curriculum has been narrowed to

meet their specialised needs. 
A reader may wish for a more thorough
investigation of potential solutions to
these problems. But “A University Educa-
tion” is nevertheless an admirably clear
analysis of English higher education. To its
credit, it is an inversion of most writing
about English universities, which tends to
be laudatory of the Oxbridge model and
unduly sceptical of others. Lord Willetts’s
book is all the more interesting for it. 7

Japanese drumming

The kudos of Kodo

Japan’s traditional drumming ensemble sets oﬀ a mighty bang
THERE is a felicitous double meaning to
Kodo, the name of the celebrated Japa-
nese drumming ensemble. Its written char-
acters mean “drum child”. But an inﬁnitesi-
mally diﬀerent stressing of the second
syllable will give you the character which
means “heartbeat”. The company regards
this accidental ambiguity as a symbolic
blessing, and drumming does indeed go
way back. It is one of humanity’s most ele-
mental forms of musical communication,
at once both mystical and—because it can
span great distances—highly practical. 
The taiko (“fat drum”) tradition was im-
ported from Tang-dynasty China. It took
root in the Japanese court, and in temples
and shrines, in forms which have scarcely
changed over 1,000 years. Over the course
of the 20th century, however, it lost its ap-
peal at home, though it was popular with
the Japanese diaspora on the west coast of
America. In the 1960s, as Japan threw itself

into modernisation, drumming came to be
seen once more as a symbol of continuity.
Taiko ensembles proliferated, with one
named Ondekoza (“demon drummers”)
hitting the headlines in 1975 when its mem-
bers ran the Boston marathon. At the end,
they picked up their drumsticks and
launched into a thunderous riﬀ.
Based on the remote island of Sado in
the Sea of Japan, Ondekoza was a com-
mune run on ferociously Spartan lines by a
visionary named Tagayasu Den. After 12
years, most of his drummers rebelled
against the constraints—no smoking or al-
cohol, no marrying—and set up Kodo as a
rival group. They stayed on the island and
(slightly) relaxed their regime. Players still
had to carve their own drumsticks and
each day began at 5am with a ten-kilo-
metre run. Their fame grew as they issued
recordings and went on tour. The annual
Earth Celebration on Sado attracts ensem-
bles from all round the globe. And they
teach, spreading the word through work-
shops to such eﬀect that there are now
hundreds of amateur taiko groups, both in
Japan and in America.
But what precisely is that “word”? Audi-
ences in Britain and across Europe will
soon have a chance to ﬁnd out when Kodo
begins its next major tour on January 30th.
Kodo programmes are sometimes inter-
larded with Japanese folk music on ﬂute
and zither, but this time their show will 
reﬂect a return to basics. 
Drumming, pure and simple, makes for
a memorable aural and visual experience.
Taiko drums come in several sizes, ranging
from the sharply resonant little shimedaiko
to the giant odaiko (pictured). Six feet (1.8
metres) high and three feet wide, it is hol-
lowed out of a single block of wood and
takes six men to hoist into place. Kodo’s
rich sound-world ranges from woodland
susurrations to a thundering which makes
you feel as if you’ve been struck in the

Drum roll

chest. Moreover, whereas Western drum-
mers work with the wrist, these men and
women drum with their whole body: they
are athletes as well as aesthetes. These
days they have swapped their traditional
Japanese headbands and (for the men)
loincloths for less nationally speciﬁc garb,
but they still move with a beauty which is
quintessentially Japanese.
Taiko drumming may be rooted in Shin-
to and Zen, but Kodo’s often lighthearted
art has no explicit connection with reli-
gion, or with the fanaticism of the Den
years; indeed, they wince at any mention
of “demon”. When drummers leave the
ensemble now, it tends to be on amicable
terms. Some players eventually ﬁnd the
Kodo style too restricting. Some cross over
into jazz and other forms, as Ryutaro Ka-
neko, their former hand-cymbal virtuoso,
has done. He is now a star in his own right
in America.
Perhaps because of its roots, there is
something spiritual about Kodo’s art. Six-
ty-seven year old Yoshikazu Fujimoto,
who has spent his entire adult life ﬁrst with
Ondekoza and then with Kodo, speaks
with profound reverence of his earth-shak-
ing daily encounter with the giant drum:
“Before I start drumming, I pray, ‘Please let
me play you.’ And I am told, ‘OK, you may
play me.’ We become one. And as I play, I
feel at peace. I become the sound.”
Asked about his earliest musical experi-
ence, Mr Kaneko gave this mystical reply:
“It came when I was three. I was under a
cherry-blossom tree, and the leaves were
ﬂuttering in the spring wind. I know this
may not sound like music to Westerners.”
As with other Kodo players, his dreams
were musical: “In my best dream I was fall-
ing through space in bright light, and sing-
ing very loudly.” Mr Kaneko looked at his
muscular forearms: “I was singing with ev-
ery limb. My whole body was singing.” 7

Amer ican ﬁction

Reading tea leaves

The Immortalists. By Chloe Benjamin.
Putnam; 346 pages; $26. Tinder Press; £16.99
SOME novels are portraits, some are
page-turning puzzles. Still others are
meditations on the mysteries of life. “The
Immortalists”, a family story with a twist,
is a bit of all of those. The tale of four
siblings marked in childhood by a terrible
prophecy, it careers through time and trag-
edy with the reader in tow, as deft and 
dizzying as a high-wire act.
Chloe Benjamin, an American writer,
sets out a startling premise: what if you
were told the date of your own death? 

1

62 Books and arts

The Economist Januar y 6th 2018

2

Varya, Daniel, Klara and Simon Gold, four
siblings in a Jewish immigrant family, visit
a fortune-teller in 1969 on the Lower East
Side of New York. From the moment each
is told when his or her life will end, they
are irrevocably altered. Suspense mounts
as the reader learns each character’s fate in
individual portraits, starting with the
youngest. What links them beyond the 
irrational power of the long-ago prophecy
is the deeper question that it raises: what
role does belief—or luck or destiny or even
magic—play in shaping a life?
 Ms Benjamin cannily withholds infor-
mation, leaving readers eager to see how

each new story tops the last. The four lives
span a wide range of settings and themes.
The youngest, Simon, races through the
sexual hedonism of San Francisco’s gay
scene in the late 1980s. Klara is a magician
whose life is spent perfecting an act she
will perform in Las Vegas. Daniel, a doctor,
faces loss on many levels in upstate New
York, while Varya is a scientist researching
longevity in a primate lab.
 Juggling so many pieces has its risks.
The rapid-ﬁre plot at times feels rushed and
contrived. The portrayal of the AIDS epi-
demic is predictable, while some of the
other developments seem wildly improb-

able. Yet, as the novel deepens, the reader
is beguiled with unexpected twists and
stylish, crisp prose. In a novel centred on
magic and mystery, Ms Benjamin uses mis-
direction to frustrate as well as entertain.
Meanwhile, the mystery of the human
mind that is the novel’s true subject lingers
long after the riddles are solved. Informa-
tion can implant itself like a virus, the older
Gold children note. Whether true or false,
genuine or placebo, Varya knew “stories
did have the power to change things: the
past and the future, even the present.” Un-
wittingly, this ambitious, unorthodox tale
may change you too. 7

Johnson

Word-birth

How words come to be used tells you a lot about diﬀerent cultures
WHERE do new words come from? 
Few are purely invented, in the
sense of being coined from a string of
sounds chosen more or less at random.
Most tend to be existing words given new
meaning (“to tweet”). In other cases, a
word changes its parts of speech (“to
Photoshop”, “to Facebook”). And in some
of the most creative instances, people
chop words and recombine them to make
new ones (as in “sexting”).
New words mostly become embed-
ded through use. A few countries have 
oﬃcial academies that declare when a
word has been accepted, but they have 
little actual inﬂuence over how people
speak. Which words make their way into
a language says a lot about where phras-
ing comes from today.
One such oﬃcial regulator is the
Dansk Sprognaevn, which has the hum-
ble task of determining oﬃcial spelling in
Danish. Many Danes take the body’s deci-
sion to include this or that word in its
spelling dictionaries as a sign that it is a
“real” word. “New Danish Words, With
Origin” a book by Jorgen Norby Jensen,
shows how rarely new Danish forms are
created by Danes from Danish roots for
speciﬁcally Danish circumstances. In-
stead, the great majority come, one way
or another, from English.
The obvious examples are those that
are borrowed wholesale. Mr Jensen oﬀers
“foodie”, “selﬁe”, “clickbait”, “blog”,
“Brexit” and “twerking” (a kind of bot-
tom-waggling dance). Only slightly more
disguised are those words whose spelling
has been changed, like metroseksuel.
Some are altered for Danish grammar
norms, like oute, the verb “to out some-
one as gay”. (Danish verbs mostly require
an “-e” at the end.)
Words of more exotic origin include
“emoji” and “barista”, which have their

origins in Japanese and Italian. But these
too, Mr Jensen writes, come via English,
not directly from those languages. This
route is more common, it seems, than that
of “quinoa”, which was borrowed directly
from Spanish (which itself took the word
from Quechua).
In another category are “English”
words and expressions that are unknown
to Anglophones. Danes have long said that
someone who is fresh and ready to go is “ﬁt
for ﬁght”. Another is “facerape”, which
means to hack someone’s social-media
proﬁle in order to ﬁddle with its personal-
information settings or to post fake status
updates. Such faux-anglicisms are com-
mon in other languages too: the German
Handy (mobile phone) or Kicker (table foot-
ball), or the French tennisman and tennis-
woman. Linguistic experts in these coun-
tries decry these words—it is bad enough to
have to borrow English words, but even
worse to counterfeit them, they reckon. But

they cannot seem to stop them.
But the book of new Danish words
shows an even deeper kind of inﬂuence.
Even where words appear Danish, they
are often simply part-for-part translations
of English words: vejvrede is “road rage”,
undskyld mit franske is “pardon my
French”, and svingvaelger, “swing voter”.
This shows that globalisation is not only
in the surface traﬃc of words, but in the
deeper exchange of concepts.
This is not to say that other languages
do not creatively coin their own words
anymore. In Denmark an amagernum-
merplade or “Amager number-plate” is a
tattoo on the lower back, named after a
once-tatty bit of Copenhagen. Svensker-
har and bundesligahar, “Swede hair” or
“Bundesliga hair”, both refer to the cut
known in English as a mullet. And curling-
foraeldre, “curling parents”, is an interest-
ing twist on “helicopter parents”: rather
than hovering over their children, they
sweep all obstacles out of their way, as in
the eponymous sport.
So English borrowing is not entirely 
replacing native creativity, even if the
heavy thumbprint of English on virtually
every language in the globalised world is
increasingly clear. This is not because Eng-
lish is particularly supple, wonderful or
ﬂexible in itself; it is more to do with the
inﬂuence of innovations from the An-
glosphere, from the good (blogs) to the 
ridiculous (twerking).
It may be that the spread of concepts
from English out, rather than the other
way round, is in fact to the discredit of the
English-speaking world. Words spread
from English because people learn Eng-
lish; cultural secrets from quinoa to hygge
are more likely to be buried in other 
cultures where outsiders cannot ﬁnd
them. Perhaps the Anglophones are the
real losers in this exchange.

Courses

63

Tenders

The Economist Januar y 6th 2018

64

Economic and ﬁnancial indicators

The Economist Januar y 6th 2018

Economic data

Gross domestic product 

Industr ial 
production 

Statistics on 42 economies,
plus a closer look at GDP fore-
casts for the year ahead

Consumer pr ices Unemployment 
rate, % 

Current-account balance 

Currency units, per $

Economic data

% change on year ago

latest 

+6.8 Q3 
+2.1 Q3 
+1.7 Q3 
+3.0 Q3 
+2.6 Q3 
+3.2 Q3 
+1.7 Q3 
+2.3 Q3 
+2.8 Q3 
+1.3 Q3 
+1.7 Q3 
+3.0 Q3 
+3.1 Q3 

United States +2.3 Q3 
China 
Japan 
Br itain 
Canada 
Euro area 
Austr ia 
Belgium 
France 
Germany 
Greece 
Italy 
Netherlands 
Spain 
Czech Republic +4.7 Q3 
Denmark 
Norway 
Poland 
Russia 
Sweden  
Switzerland 
Turkey 
Australia 
Hong Kong 
India 
Indonesia 
Malaysia 
Pakistan 
Philippines 
Singapore 
South Korea 
Taiwan 
Thailand 
Argentina 
Brazil 
Chile 
Colombia 
Mexico 
Venezuela 
Egypt 
Israel 
Saudi Arabia 
South Afr ica 

+1.4 Q3 
+3.2 Q3 
+5.1 Q3 
+1.8 Q3 
+2.9 Q3 
+1.2 Q3 
+11.1 Q3 
+2.8 Q3 
+3.6 Q3 
+6.3 Q3 
+5.1 Q3 
+6.2 Q3 

+6.9 Q3 
+3.1 Q4 
+3.8 Q3 
+3.1 Q3 
+4.3 Q3 
+4.2 Q3 
+1.4 Q3 
+2.2 Q3 
+2.0 Q3 
+1.5 Q3 
-8.8 Q4~ 
nil Q3 
+1.9 Q3 
-0.7 2017 
+0.8 Q3 

+5.7 2017** 

qtr* 2017† 
+3.2 +2.2 
+7.0 +6.8 
+2.5 
+1.5 
+1.6 
+1.5 
+1.7 +3.0 
+2.4 +2.2 
+1.4 +2.7 
+1.0 
+1.7 
+2.3 
+1.8 
+3.3 +2.4 
+1.2 
+1.3 
+1.4 
+1.5 
+1.6 +3.2 
+3.1 
+3.1 
+1.9 +4.5 
-1.9 +2.2 
+3.0 
+2.1 
+4.9 +4.6 
na 
+1.9 
+3.1 +3.0 
+2.5 +0.9 
na +5.0 
+2.4 +2.4 
+2.0 +3.7 
+8.7 +6.5 
na 
+5.1 
na +5.8 
na +5.7 
+5.3 +6.6 
+2.8 
+3.1 
+6.3 
+3.1 
+6.8 +2.4 
+4.0 +3.6 
+3.6 +2.8 
+0.6 +0.8 
+6.0 
+1.4 
+3.2 
+1.6 
-1.2 
+2.1 
-6.2 -12.5 
na +4.2 
+3.5 +3.6 
na 
-0.7 
+2.0 +0.7 

latest 
latest 
2017† 
+3.4 Nov 
+2.2 Nov 
+2.1 
+6.1 Nov 
+1.7 Nov 
+1.6 
+3.7 Nov 
+0.5 Nov 
+0.5 
+3.5 Oct 
+3.1 Nov 
+2.7 
+4.6 Oct 
+2.1 Nov 
+1.5 
+3.7 Oct 
+1.5 Nov 
+1.5 
+4.4 Oct 
+2.3 Nov 
+2.1 
+6.7 Oct 
+2.1 Dec 
+2.2 
+5.5 Oct 
+1.2 Nov 
+1.1 
+2.7 Oct 
+1.7 Dec 
+1.7 
+0.4 Oct 
+1.1 Nov 
+1.1 
+3.1 Oct 
+0.9 Nov 
+1.4 
+3.9 Oct 
+1.5 Nov 
+1.3 
+7.0 Oct 
+1.2 Dec 
+2.0 
+10.4 Oct 
+2.6 Nov 
+2.5 
+0.2 Oct 
+1.3 Nov 
+1.1 
-4.2 Oct 
+1.1 Nov 
+1.9 
+9.0 Nov 
+2.0 Dec 
+2.0 
-3.8 Nov 
+2.5 Dec 
+3.8 
+6.0 Oct 
+1.9 Nov 
+1.9 
+8.7 Q3 
+0.8 Nov 
+0.5 
+8.9 Oct +11.9 Dec 
+10.0 
+3.5 Q3 
+1.8 Q3 
+2.0 
+0.3 Q3 
+1.5 Nov 
+1.6 
+2.2 Oct 
+4.9 Nov 
+3.4 
+6.4 Oct 
+3.6 Dec 
+3.9 
+3.4 Oct 
+3.4 Nov 
+3.9 
+8.7 Oct 
+4.6 Dec 
+4.1 
-6.6 Oct 
+3.3 Nov 
+3.2 
+5.3 Nov 
+0.6 Nov 
+0.6 
-1.6 Nov 
+1.5 Dec 
+2.1 
+0.9 Nov 
+0.3 Nov 
+0.6 
+4.2 Nov 
+0.8 Dec 
+0.7 
-2.5 Oct +22.3 Nov +25.2 
+5.2 Oct 
+2.8 Nov 
+3.4 
+2.3 Nov 
+1.9 Nov 
+2.2 
-0.3 Oct 
+4.1 Nov 
+4.3 
-1.1 Oct 
+6.6 Nov 
+5.9 
+0.8 Sep 
na  
+931 
+25.0 Oct +26.0 Nov +26.8 
+2.5 Oct 
+0.3 Nov 
+0.3 
na  
+0.1 Nov 
-0.3 
+1.1 Oct 
+4.6 Nov 
+5.3 

latest 12 
months, $bn 
-452.5 Q3 
+121.6 Q3 
+198.8 Oct 
-118.1 Q3 
-45.8 Q3 
+393.8 Oct 
+8.5 Q3 
-3.9 Sep 
-22.5 Oct 
+279.0 Oct 
-1.2 Oct 
+54.6 Oct 
+80.7 Q3 
+23.0 Oct 
+0.9 Q3 
+27.6 Oct 
+21.1 Q3 
+1.4 Oct 
+32.7 Q3 
+21.1 Q3 
+66.4 Q3 
-41.9 Oct 
-22.2 Q3 
+14.8 Q3 
-33.6 Q3 
-13.3 Q3 
+9.2 Q3 
-14.5 Q3 
-0.5 Sep 
+57.4 Q3 
+81.9 Oct 
+74.1 Q3 
+47.4 Q3 
-26.6 Q3 
-11.3 Nov 
-4.6 Q3 
-11.1 Q3 
-16.1 Q3 
-17.8 Q3~ 
-12.2 Q3 
+10.5 Q3 
+12.4 Q3 
-7.3 Q3 

% of GDP 
2017† 
-2.5 
+1.3 
+3.5 
-4.0 
-2.9 
+3.1 
+2.2 
-0.3 
-1.5 
+7.9 
-0.6 
+2.6 
+9.7 
+1.4 
+0.7 
+8.3 
+4.9 
+0.1 
+2.3 
+4.4 
+9.7 
-3.5 
-1.4 
+6.4 
-1.5 
-1.6 
+2.5 
-4.9 
-0.3 
+18.3 
+5.5 
+13.6 
+11.6 
-3.9 
-0.7 
-1.3 
-3.6 
-1.9 
-0.7 
-6.4 
+2.7 
+3.3 
-2.3 

4.1 Nov 
4.0 Q3§ 
2.7 Nov 

4.3 Sep†† 

5.9 Nov 
8.8 Oct 
5.4 Oct 
6.9 Oct 
9.4 Oct 

3.6 Oct‡ 

20.6 Aug 
11.1 Oct 
5.4 Nov 
16.7 Oct 

2.6 Oct‡ 

4.3 Oct 

4.0 Oct‡‡ 
6.5 Nov§ 
5.1 Nov§ 
5.8 Nov§ 

3.0 Nov 
10.6 Sep§ 
5.4 Nov 

3.0 Nov‡‡ 
5.0 2015 

5.5 Q3§ 

3.4 Oct§ 
5.9 2015 

5.0 Q4§ 
2.2 Q3 

3.2 Nov§ 

3.7 Nov 

1.1 Nov§ 

8.3 Q3§ 
12.0 Nov§ 

6.5 Nov§‡‡ 
8.4 Nov§ 

3.5 Nov 

7.3 Apr§ 

11.9 Q3§ 
4.3 Nov 

5.6 2016 

27.7 Q3§ 

Budget 
balance 

Interest
rates, %

% of GDP 10-year gov't 
2017† 
bonds, latest 
-3.5 
2.43 
-4.3 
3.88§§ 
-4.4 
0.04 
-3.0 
1.25 
-1.8 
2.05 
-1.3 
0.45 
-1.0 
0.57 
-2.1 
0.69 
-2.9 
0.76 
+0.6 
0.45 
-0.8 
4.08 
-2.3 
2.07 
+0.4 
0.56 
-3.0 
1.50 
+0.7 
1.69 
-0.6 
0.51 
+5.2 
1.65 
-3.3 
3.30 
-2.1 
8.13 
+1.0 
0.80 
+0.8 
-0.10 
-2.0 
11.74 
-1.7 
2.68 
+1.7 
1.87 
-3.1 
7.32 
-2.8 
6.30 
-3.0 
3.92 
-5.9 
7.93††† 
-2.1 
5.55 
-1.0 
2.04 
+0.8 
2.51 
-0.1 
0.93 
-2.4 
2.27 
-6.1 
3.72 
-8.0 
8.62 
-2.7 
4.50 
-3.3 
6.35 
-1.9 
7.52 
-19.4 
8.24 
-10.8 
na 
-1.8 
1.66 
-6.6 
3.68 
-3.9 
8.61 

Jan 3rd 
- 
6.50 
112 
0.74 
1.25 
0.83 
0.83 
0.83 
0.83 
0.83 
0.83 
0.83 
0.83 
0.83 
21.2 
6.18 
8.14 
3.46 
57.6 
8.18 
0.97 
3.76 
1.28 
7.82 
63.5 
13,518 
4.02 
110 
49.9 
1.33 
1,061 
29.6 
32.6 
18.5 
3.26 
607 
2,936 
19.5 
9.99 
17.7 
3.46 
3.75 
12.5 

year ago
-
6.96
118
0.82
1.34
0.96
0.96
0.96
0.96
0.96
0.96
0.96
0.96
0.96
26.0
7.16
8.66
4.23
60.7
9.18
1.03
3.59
1.39
7.76
68.3
13,480
4.49
105
49.8
1.45
1,204
32.2
35.8
15.9
3.25
674
2,975
20.8
10.0
18.2
3.87
3.75
13.8

Source: Haver Analytics.  *% change on previous quar ter, annual rate. †The Economist poll or Economist Intelligence Unit estimate/forecast. §Not seasonally adjusted. ‡New ser ies. ~2014 **Year ending June. ††Latest 
3 months. ‡‡3-month moving average. §§5-year yield. †††Dollar-denominated bonds. 

 
 
 
 
The Economist Januar y 6th 2018 

Economic and ﬁnancial indicators 65

Markets

Index 

Markets

3,487.4 
4,005.6 
5,331.3 
12,978.2 
817.3 
21,904.6 
549.3 
1,021.3 
1,086.8 
933.2 
39,604.4 
912.4 
63,896.3 
1,183.1 
1,587.6 
9,478.9 
116,052.1 
6,175.3 

% change on
Dec 30th 2016
one 
in local 
in $
Jan 3rd week currency terms
24,922.7 
+0.6 
+26.1 +26.1
3,528.4 
+2.9 
+8.6 +16.0
22,764.9 
-0.6 
+19.1 +23.6
7,671.1 
+0.7 
+7.4 
+17.4
16,371.6 
+1.0 
+7.1 +14.6
-0.8 
+9.2 +24.4
-1.1 
+6.7 +21.6
+1.7 
+33.2 
+51.8
+0.1 
+11.1 +26.6
-0.7 
+9.6 +25.0
-0.7 
+13.0 +28.9
+1.0 
+27.0 +44.8
-1.3 
+13.9 +29.8
+0.1 
+13.7 +29.6
-0.5 
+8.2 +23.4
+0.3 
+17.9 +42.4
+0.4 
+16.9 +33.0
+1.1 
+23.8 +41.3
+0.4 
+19.3 +26.6
nil 
+23.5 +49.2
+3.0 
+2.7 
+2.7
-0.5 
+4.6 +16.4
+0.5 
+15.3 +20.0
+3.5 
+48.5 +38.7
+0.1 
+8.0 
+17.2
+3.3 
+38.9 
+37.8
-0.3 
+26.9 +35.6
-0.4 
+18.0 +18.0
+1.2 
+9.2 +22.1
+3.5 
-13.1 
-17.9
+2.1 
+20.3 +30.7
+2.0 
+22.7 +39.2
+3.0 
+16.7 
+27.2
+1.5 
+15.3 
+27.8
+7.8 
+86.1 +60.0
+2.5 
+29.5 +29.6
+2.0 
+36.1 +50.2
+1.7 
+14.4 +18.1
+2.3 
+9.1 +15.6
-0.1 
-96.0 
na
-0.5 
+20.2 +23.0
+1.6 
+8.3 +20.7
+0.3 
-0.2 
-0.1
+1.3 
+17.7 +30.1

United States (DJIA) 
China (SSEA) 
Japan (Nikkei 225) 
Br itain (FTSE 100) 
Canada (S&P TSX) 
Euro area (FTSE Euro 100) 1,214.0 
Euro area (EURO STOXX 50) 3,509.9 
Austr ia (ATX) 
Belgium (Bel 20) 
France (CAC 40) 
Germany (DAX)* 
Greece (Athex Comp) 
Italy (FTSE/MIB) 
Netherlands (AEX) 
Spain (Madr id SE) 
Czech Republic (PX) 
Denmark (OMXCB) 
Hungary (BUX) 
Norway (OSEAX) 
Poland (WIG) 
Russia (RTS, $ terms) 
Sweden (OMXS30) 
Switzerland (SMI) 
Turkey (BIST) 
Australia (All Ord.) 
Hong Kong (Hang Seng) 30,561.0 
India (BSE) 
Indonesia (JSX) 
Malaysia (KLSE) 
Pakistan (KSE) 
Singapore (STI) 
South Korea (KOSPI) 
Taiwan (TWI)  
Thailand (SET) 
Argentina (MERV) 
Brazil (BVSP) 
Chile (IGPA) 
Colombia (IGBC) 
Mexico (IPC) 
Venezuela (IBC) 
Egypt (EGX 30) 
Israel (TA-125) 
Saudi Arabia (Tadawul) 
South Afr ica (JSE AS) 

33,793.4 
6,251.5 
1,792.8 
41,544.3 
3,464.3 
2,486.4 
10,801.6 
1,778.5 
31,476.3 
77,995.1 
28,227.9 
11,560.9 
49,782.2 
1,261.9 
14,833.7 
1,382.6 
7,224.3 
59,629.6 

GDP forecasts

2018, % change on a year earlier
Worst-per forming

Best-per forming

12

10

8

6

4

2

–

0

2+

0

2

4

6

8

10

Venezuela

Puer to Rico

Equator ial Guinea

Nor th Korea

Brunei

Sur iname

Swaziland

Belarus

Saudi Arabia

Qatar

Source: Economist Intelligence Unit

Dominica

India

Bhutan

Anguilla

Ethiopia

Guinea

Cambodia

Bangladesh

Libya

Myanmar

Other markets

Other markets

Index 

345.4 
1,817.6 

% change on
Dec 30th 2016
one 
in local 
in $
Jan 3rd week currency terms
2,713.1 
+1.1 
+21.2 +21.2
+1.8 
+31.3 +31.3
+2.1 
+1.1 
+1.1
-0.7 
+19.7 +24.2
-0.1 
+7.4 +22.4
+1.1 
+21.4 +21.4
+3.5 
+37.3 
+37.3
519.2 
+1.4 
+23.1 +23.1
949.9 
+0.4 
+7.5 
+7.5
836.7 
+0.2 
+8.4 
+8.4
1,275.6§ 
nil 
+6.0 
+6.0
9.2 +10.5 
+14.0 (levels)
44.3 
-2.4 
-38.6 
-30.0
46.8 
-5.0 
-30.9 
-30.9
7.8 
-4.6 
+18.3 +34.8

United States (S&P 500) 
United States (NAScomp) 7,065.5 
China (SSEB, $ terms) 
Japan (Topix) 
Europe (FTSEurof irst 300) 1,533.5 
World, dev'd (MSCI) 
Emerging markets (MSCI) 1,184.2 
World, all (MSCI) 
World bonds (Citigroup) 
EMBI+ (JPMorgan) 
Hedge funds (HFRX) 
Volatility, US (VIX) 
CDSs, Eur (iTRAXX)† 
CDSs, N Am (CDX)† 
Carbon trading (EU ETS) € 

2,125.6 

Sources: IHS Markit; Thomson Reuters.  *Total return index. 
†Credit-default-swap spreads, basis points. §Dec 29th.

Indicators for more countr ies and additional
Indicators for more countr ies and additional

ser ies, go to: Economist.com/indicators
ser ies, go to: Economist.com/indicators

The Economist commodity-pr ice index

2005=100

The Economist commodity-price index

% change on
Dec 19th Dec 26th Jan 2nd 
one 
one
2017 
2017 
2018* month 
year

Dollar index

All items 
Food 
Industr ials 
 All 
 Nfa† 
 Metals 

144.9 
146.7 

143.1 
134.6 
146.7 

Sterling index

147.7 
147.6 

150.9 
149.6 

+3.4 
-0.5 

+6.4
-3.4

147.9 
136.8 
152.6 

152.3 
138.0 
158.4 

+7.7 
+3.8 
+9.3 

+18.5
-0.1
+27.4

All items 

197.9 

201.0 

202.1 

+2.5 

-4.1

Euro index

All items 

153.2 

154.8 

155.8 

+1.6 

-8.3

Gold

$ per oz 1,254.7 

1,282.5 1,313.1 

+3.9 

+13.6

West Texas Intermediate

$ per barrel 57.3 

60.0 

60.4 

+4.8 

+15.4

Sources: Bloomberg; CME Group; Cotlook; Darmenn & Curl; FT; ICCO;
ICO; ISO; Live Rice Index; LME; NZ Wool Ser vices; Thompson Lloyd & 
Ewar t; Thomson Reuters; Urner Barr y; WSJ.  *Provisional  
†Non-food agr iculturals.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
66

Obituar y Simonetta Puccini

O mio nonno caro

Simonetta Puccini, the last direct heir of the Maestro and keeper of his ﬂame, died
on December 16th, aged 89
WHEN visitors came to Torre del Lago,
Giacomo Puccini’s villa on the
shores of a lake overlooking the Apuan
Alps, Simonetta Puccini would sometimes
meet them at the gates. All smiles, she
would lead them through gardens thickly
planted with palms, shrubs and roses, into
the hall. There hung the Maestro’s oilskin
coat, the one he wore to go out snipe-hunt-
ing on the lake, beside his shotguns and
boots. In the living room stood the black
Forster upright on which he had composed
“La Bohème”, “Tosca” and “Madame But-
terﬂy”, while ash from his continuous ciga-
rettes fell upon the keys. His pencils and
spectacles lay on the desk; his operas
played in the background. She had ar-
ranged all this, with the greatest care, as if
he was still there, and would greet her
round the corner with a grandfatherly kiss. 
She had done it, too, to make the point
that she was his heir and no one else. It
took decades, battling one counter-claim
after another through the Italian courts.
She gained a reputation for being tosta, a
real piece of work. So she was, despite the
smiles and the pearls, and so she had to be. 
The fundamental problem was her
grandfather’s wild love-life, especially
with girls from below stairs. She was an-
noyed when guides and books romped
around in this: religious herself, she pre-

ferred to dwell on his creative, spiritual
side. Time and again, however, she had to
face the fact that her nonno had left not
only a fortune, still estimated in 1975 at
24bn lire ($36m), but also illegitimate chil-
dren whose heirs were demanding a share. 
Her own lineage was not straightfor-
ward. Her father was Puccini’s only legiti-
mate child, Antonio, but her mother (an
amour before Antonio’s marriage to Rita)
was a village girl, Giuseppina Giurumello.
Giuseppina bravely brought her up alone,
despite the shame of it. Her father did not
recognise her oﬃcially, since Rita could not
bear the very thought of her; but he paid
for her education as far as university, came
to see her, and wrote letters ending il tuo
caro babbo. He also talked to her of the
Maestro: his love of cars, the telephone, the
phonograph, speedboats, and how he had
worked at night, with dampers on the keys,
so the family could sleep. Simonetta never
knew him, for he died ﬁve years before she
was born. But these images, and the pas-
sionate sweep of his music, brought her se-
curely under his spell. She grew up feeling,
knowing, she was a Puccini—even though
the name she grew up with, and later
taught literature and history under, was
Giurumello. 
When her father died the Puccini estate
went to the scornful Rita. Simonetta got

The Economist Januar y 6th 2018

merely a monthly stipend, but at 17 and ille-
gitimate she had no power to object. She
struggled while others revelled. When Rita
died in 1979 the estate went to her bachelor
brother, Count Livio dell’Anna, who blew
much of it in Monte Carlo before his butler-
lover began to fritter away the rest. But
since 1974, when she was 45, Simonetta
had been on the case. For in 1973 a new
family law in Italy had done away with the
concept of illegitimacy, and in 1980 Italy’s
highest civil court agreed that she could
take the name Puccini. She did so at once; it
turned her into a force to be reckoned with. 

Madame Gadﬂy
Gradually she acquired a share of the mon-
ey and, more important, control of the
houses at Torre del Lago and Lucca. They
were falling apart, so she raised money to
repair them. As chatelaine of Torre del
Lago the ﬁrst thing she did was to ﬁre Gia-
como, the caretaker, who shambled round
the villa drunk, prattling of the Maestro’s
donne. The caretaker’s father, Claudio,
claimed to be one of the by-blows, even
born in the house. Now that illegitimacy
no longer mattered, he demanded a DNA
test to prove he was the rightful heir. She re-
fused, of course. Such a test would mean
opening Puccini’s green marble tomb in
the chapel there, disturbing his sacred re-
mains. The challenge withered, as did an-
other DNA request in 2008 from the grand-
daughter of one Giulia Manfredi, said to be
Puccini’s lover. Simonetta’s furious posters
went up all round Lucca, appealing to peo-
ple to protect Puccini’s memory against
“inventions” and “local gossip”.
Some people never believed her own
claim, calling her a fortune-hunter, and
cruelly pointing out how much the Man-
fredi menfolk looked like the Maestro. It
was extremely annoying, too, that Rita had
set up a Puccini Foundation to sponsor re-
search and protect the sites. That was her
job, as the bearer of the Name, and in 1979
she started the Institute of Puccini Studies
(from 2005, the Simonetta Puccini Founda-
tion) to do the same thing in a completely
separate way. She edited two volumes of
his letters and, in “The Puccini Compan-
ion”, co-written with William Weaver, laid
out the true family history for all to see.
Sadly the operas were no longer in copy-
right, but she kept close watch, objecting
loudly when the 1904 version of “Madame
Butterﬂy”, disowned by the Maestro, was
staged in 2016 at La Scala. Her beloved
nonno would never have wanted that. 
Several times a year she held masses for
the dead at Torre del Lago, and kept the
chapel full of fresh ﬂowers. Her own funer-
al requests were simple, but emphatic. A
string quartet would play “Crisantemi”,
her favourite Puccini piece. Then her ashes
would join him, protectively, deﬁnitively,
behind the green marble wall. 7

Evolved over billions
of years...
Protecting your enterprise
in one hour.

The immune system has evolved over billions of 
years. But it takes just one hour to install one in 
your enterprise. 

Using artiﬁ cial intelligence, Darktrace can tell friend 
from foe, and catches threats that others miss. 
Even if they’ve never been seen before.

From quiet insider threats and zero-day attacks, to 
hacks of connected devices or industrial networks, 
our software sees it and responds. 

 
 
 
