2017-11-04

The world this week
Leaders
Letters
Briefing
United States
The Americas
Essay
Asia
China
Middle East and Africa
Europe
Britain
International
Business
Finance and economics
Science and technology
Books and arts
Obituary
Economic and financial indicators

| Next section | Main menu |

The world this week

Politics this week [Thu, 02 Nov 23:23]
Business this week [Thu, 02 Nov 23:23]
KAL’s cartoon [Thu, 02 Nov 23:23]

| Next section | Main menu |

| Next | Section menu | Main menu |

Politics this week

Nov 2nd 2017

A 29-year-old immigrant from Uzbekistan ploughed a pickup truck into
pedestrians along a cycle path in New York, killing at least eight people in a
terror attack apparently inspired by Islamic State. The man was detained by
police after being shot. Although vehicles have become a familiar weapon of
choice for jihadists in Europe, these are the first fatalities from such an attack
in America. See article

The first charges were laid in the investigation led by Robert Mueller, the
special counsel looking into Russian interference in last year’s election.
Paul Manafort, Donald Trump’s former campaign manager, and his business
associate, Rick Gates, were charged with conspiracy and money-laundering.
Both pleaded not guilty. George Papadopoulos, a junior adviser on foreign
policy in the Trump campaign, pleaded guilty to lying to the FBI about trying
to forge links with Russian officials. See article

A judge blocked Mr Trump’s ban on transgender people serving in the
armed forces from coming into effect, at least until a lawsuit brought by a

group of plaintiffs has been resolved. The Pentagon is currently working out
how to put the ban into place.

A pyrrhic victory

Uhuru Kenyatta was declared the winner in Kenya’s disputed presidential
election, which was boycotted by his main opponent, Raila Odinga. Turnout
was low at less than 40%, around half of that in the poll held in August,
which was annulled by the supreme court because of irregularities. Mr
Odinga said the result was a sham. See article

Liberia’s supreme court halted a presidential run-off election that was to be
held on November 7th, after complaints of fraud by a losing candidate in last
month’s first round. George Weah and Joseph Boakai are the two candidates
in the run-off vying to replace Ellen Johnson Sirleaf.

Rating agencies criticised South Africa’s latest budget, warning that debt
may soar to as much as 60% of GDP.

Hamas, an Islamist party that took control of Gaza in 2007, started handing
control over the territory’s border crossings to the Palestinian Authority as
part of the reconciliation deal between the two Palestinian factions.

Masoud Barzani, the president of Iraq’s Kurdish region since 2005, resigned
in the aftermath of a referendum on independence that led to Iraqi
government forces taking back control of key oilfields and the city of Kirkuk.

The fall of Lenín

Ecuador’s ruling Alianza PAIS party kicked out its leader, Lenín Moreno,
who is also the country’s president. The move is the latest in a battle between
Rafael Correa, a former president, and Mr Moreno, who has distanced
himself from the populist party by pursuing reform and building bridges with
the opposition.

A recently elected governor was sacked in Venezuela after he refused to
swear loyalty to the all-powerful constituent assembly aligned with President
Nicolás Maduro’s ruling socialists. Three opposition parties announced that
they will boycott municipal elections in December. See article

A team of international lawyers concluded that a network of businessmen and
state officials helped plan and cover up the murder in 2016 of Berta Cáceres,
an environmental activist in Honduras.

Contestants in Peru’s Miss Universe pageant surprised the audience by
reciting statistics about violence against women rather than their bust, waist
and hip measurements.

Peaceable diplomacy

China and South Korea agreed to restore normal relations. The two
countries’ ties have been strained by South Korea’s deployment of an
American anti-missile system known as THAAD, which China describes as a
threat to its security. China says its position has not changed, but it will ease
its pressure on South Korean businesses.

China’s internet censors announced new regulations aimed at curbing the
spread of “illegal information”. Staff at news websites will be required to
undergo training in “the Marxist view of journalism”. Those who fail to
promote “a positive and healthy…online culture” face dismissal.

The courts in Australia removed five MPs from parliament because they
hold dual nationality. They include Barnaby Joyce, the deputy prime
minister. His dismissal has cost the government its one-seat majority. Mr
Joyce has renounced his New Zealand citizenship and is contesting the by-
election for his seat. See article

An official American watchdog reported that 43% of Afghanistan was either
contested territory or under the control of the Taliban, slightly more than six
months ago. The American army barred it from releasing details about the
numbers, casualty rates and readiness of Afghan forces.

Spain reasserts control

Spain imposed direct rule on Catalonia, hours after the region’s parliament
had approved a unilateral declaration of independence. Catalonia’s president,
Carles Puigdemont, was stripped of his office and fled to Brussels to escape
proposed charges of sedition and rebellion, which could carry a 30-year jail
sentence. New elections have been set for December 21st, one reason why
there was little protest against Madrid’s action. See article

In Britain, Sir Michael Fallon resigned as defence secretary amid allegations

of inappropriate sexual behaviour, admitting that his conduct had “fallen
short”. Parliament is awash with rumours and speculation of many more
accusations from women, and some men, of sexual harassment by MPs.
Britain’s deputy prime minister has also been accused of inappropriate
behaviour by a Tory activist, which he denies. See article

France ended a two-year state of emergency, imposed following the terror
attack on Paris in 2015. A tough new security law is now in place.

Cycle racked

Amsterdam’s district court ruled that officials can ban beer bikes, a popular
way for tourists to enjoy occasions such as stag parties, ruling that they are a
public-order offence. Operators of the beer-chuggers’ chariots successfully
challenged a previous ban. But now the city’s residents, fed up with
freewheeling, drunken louts on their streets, have worked in tandem to
pressure the council to act. There is no indication that it will back-pedal on
this latest ruling.

This article was downloaded by calibre from https://www.economist.com/news/world-
week/21730923-politics-week/print

| Section menu | Main menu |

| Next | Section menu | Main menu | Previous |

Business this week

Nov 2nd 2017

The Bank of England raised its benchmark interest rate by a quarter of a
percentage point to 0.5%, its first rate increase in a decade. After the Brexit
referendum last year the bank cut the rate from 0.5% to 0.25%, but inflation,
at 3%, is now well above the bank’s 2% target and the economy is proving to
be more robust than expected. For example, data out this week suggest that
manufacturing is thriving. See article

Markets were unfazed in their reaction to the first steps by the European
Central Bank to ease its monetary-stimulus programme. On October 26th
the ECB announced that it will cut in half the amount of bonds it buys each
month to €30bn ($35bn) from January, but said its programme remained
open-ended. Mario Draghi, the ECB’s president, stressed that this was not
“tapering…just a downsize”.

America and the euro zone reported solid economic growth for the third
quarter. America’s GDP increased at an annualised rate of 3%. The economy
has now expanded by 3% or more in two consecutive quarters for the first

time since 2014. The euro zone recorded growth of 2.5% year on year.

The new normal?

Oil prices continued to rally, buoyed by support from officials at OPEC and
in Russia for extending the deal to cut output that has reduced a global glut in
the commodity. The price of Brent crude rose by 9% in October and this
week was trading close to $62 a barrel, the highest level in two years.

BP said it was planning its operations on the expectation that oil prices will
average between $50 and $55 a barrel next year. No longer hindered by
payouts related to the Deepwater Horizon oil spill in 2010, the oil company is
reporting healthy earnings again, doubling its headline profit in the latest
quarter to $1.9bn. It has commenced a share buy-back programme for the
first time since 2014.

Carsten Kengeter decided to step down as chief executive of Deutsche Börse
at the end of the year, amid allegations of insider trading. Prosecutors are
investigating him over shares that he bought in the German exchange before
it announced that it was seeking a merger with the London Stock Exchange, a
deal that eventually fell apart. Mr Kengeter denies any wrongdoing.

Peter Hain, a Labour peer, told the House of Lords in Britain that he had
information about illicit transfers of large sums of money out of South Africa
made through a British bank by the Gupta business family, which is at the
centre of a political scandal in the country. Lord Hain has sent a letter to the
Treasury asking it to investigate the bank, which is reported to be HSBC.

The electronic industry’s huge appetite for memory chips drove Samsung
Electronics to another bumper quarterly profit. Its semiconductor business
made an operating profit of 10trn won ($8.8bn) from July to September, up
from 3.4trn won in the same three months last year. Meanwhile, the South
Korean company shook up its senior management, replacing all three co-
chief executives. The de facto head of Samsung Group, Lee Jae-yong, was
convicted in August of corruption.

CVS Health, America’s largest chain of pharmacies, was reported to be in
talks to buy Aetna, a big health-insurer, for $66bn. An important part of

CVS’s business is as a pharmacy-benefit manager, negotiating drug prices for
health plans. If the pair strike a deal it will face intense scrutiny from
trustbusters. See article

In a deal that creates America’s largest homebuilder, Lennar agreed to buy
CalAtlantic, a smaller competitor, for $9.3bn. The combined company will
operate in 21 states.

Huntsman, an American chemical company, and Clariant, a Swiss rival,
scrapped their $20bn proposed merger, following opposition from activist
investors.

Tesla Motors pushed back its target of producing 5,000 Model 3 cars a
week, from the end of this year to March. The Model 3 is the electric-
carmaker’s newest and cheapest vehicle. It ran into production snags during
the third quarter, which the company blames on assembling battery packs at
its factory in Nevada.

Social that

Executives from Facebook, Google and Twitter were grilled in Congress
about why they had not spotted the political ads from Russian provocateurs
placed on their websites during last year’s election. The politicians demanded
more action from the social-media giants to monitor such activity. Mark
Zuckerberg (who was not at the hearings) said he was “dead serious” about
rooting out “bad content”, but warned that Facebook’s costs would rise
sharply as a result. He was speaking as Facebook reported a year-on-year
79% jump in profit for the third quarter.

This article was downloaded by calibre from https://www.economist.com/news/world-
week/21730929-business-week/print

| Section menu | Main menu |

| Next | Section menu | Main menu | Previous |

KAL’s cartoon

Nov 2nd 2017

This article was downloaded by calibre from https://www.economist.com/news/world-
week/21730926-kals-cartoon/print

| Section menu | Main menu |

| Next section | Main menu | Previous section |

Leaders

The politics of outrage: Do social media threaten

democracy? [Thu, 02 Nov 23:23]

Nov 23:23]

Robert Mueller’s investigation: Filtering out the noise [Thu, 02
India’s superficial government: Modi blues [Thu, 02 Nov 23:23]
American health care: Prescription debate [Thu, 02 Nov 23:23]
Catalonia: After a month of madness [Thu, 02 Nov 23:23]

| Next section | Main menu | Previous section |

| Next | Section menu | Main menu |

Scandal, outrage and politics

Do social media threaten democracy?

Facebook, Google and Twitter were supposed to save politics as good
information drove out prejudice and falsehood. Something has gone very
wrong

Nov 4th 2017

IN 1962 a British political scientist, Bernard Crick, published “In Defence of
Politics”. He argued that the art of political horse-trading, far from being
shabby, lets people of different beliefs live together in a peaceful, thriving
society. In a liberal democracy, nobody gets exactly what he wants, but
everyone broadly has the freedom to lead the life he chooses. However,
without decent information, civility and conciliation, societies resolve their
differences by resorting to coercion.

How Crick would have been dismayed by the falsehood and partisanship on
display in this week’s Senate committee hearings in Washington. Not long
ago social media held out the promise of a more enlightened politics, as
accurate information and effortless communication helped good people drive

out corruption, bigotry and lies. Yet Facebook acknowledged that before and
after last year’s American election, between January 2015 and August this
year, 146m users may have seen Russian misinformation on its platform.
Google’s YouTube admitted to 1,108 Russian-linked videos and Twitter to
36,746 accounts. Far from bringing enlightenment, social media have been
spreading poison.

Russia’s trouble-making is only the start. From South Africa to Spain,
politics is getting uglier. Part of the reason is that, by spreading untruth and
outrage, corroding voters’ judgment and aggravating partisanship, social
media erode the conditions for the horse-trading that Crick thought fosters
liberty.

A shorter attention spa…oh, look at that!

The use of social media does not cause division so much as amplify it. The
financial crisis of 2007-08 stoked popular anger at a wealthy elite that had
left everyone else behind. The culture wars have split voters by identity rather
than class. Nor are social media alone in their power to polarise—just look at
cable TV and talk radio. But, whereas Fox News is familiar, social-media
platforms are new and still poorly understood. And, because of how they
work, they wield extraordinary influence.

They make their money by putting photos, personal posts, news stories and
ads in front of you. Because they can measure how you react, they know just
how to get under your skin (see article). They collect data about you in order
to have algorithms to determine what will catch your eye, in an “attention
economy” that keeps users scrolling, clicking and sharing—again and again
and again. Anyone setting out to shape opinion can produce dozens of ads,
analyse them and see which is hardest to resist. The result is compelling: one
study found that users in rich countries touch their phones 2,600 times a day.

It would be wonderful if such a system helped wisdom and truth rise to the
surface. But, whatever Keats said, truth is not beauty so much as it is hard
work—especially when you disagree with it. Everyone who has scrolled
through Facebook knows how, instead of imparting wisdom, the system
dishes out compulsive stuff that tends to reinforce people’s biases.

This aggravates the politics of contempt that took hold, in the United States at
least, in the 1990s. Because different sides see different facts, they share no
empirical basis for reaching a compromise. Because each side hears time and
again that the other lot are good for nothing but lying, bad faith and slander,
the system has even less room for empathy. Because people are sucked into a
maelstrom of pettiness, scandal and outrage, they lose sight of what matters
for the society they share.

This tends to discredit the compromises and subtleties of liberal democracy,
and to boost the politicians who feed off conspiracy and nativism. Consider
the probes into Russia’s election hack by Congress and the special
prosecutor, Robert Mueller, who has just issued his first indictments. After
Russia attacked America, Americans ended up attacking each other (see
article). Because the framers of the constitution wanted to hold back tyrants
and mobs, social media aggravate Washington gridlock. In Hungary and
Poland, without such constraints, they help sustain an illiberal, winner-takes-
all style of democracy. In Myanmar, where Facebook is the main source of
news for many, it has deepened the hatred of the Rohingya, victims of ethnic
cleansing.

Social media, social responsibility

What is to be done? People will adapt, as they always do. A survey this week
found that only 37% of Americans trust what they get from social media, half
the share that trust printed newspapers and magazines. Yet in the time it takes
to adapt, bad governments with bad politics could do a lot of harm.

Society has created devices, such as libel, and ownership laws, to rein in old
media. Some are calling for social-media companies, like publishers, to be
similarly accountable for what appears on their platforms; to be more
transparent; and to be treated as monopolies that need breaking up. All these
ideas have merit, but they come with trade-offs. When Facebook farms out
items to independent outfits for fact-checking, the evidence that it moderates
behaviour is mixed. Moreover, politics is not like other kinds of speech; it is
dangerous to ask a handful of big firms to deem what is healthy for society.
Congress wants transparency about who pays for political ads, but a lot of
malign influence comes through people carelessly sharing barely credible
news posts. Breaking up social-media giants might make sense in antitrust

terms, but it would not help with political speech—indeed, by multiplying the
number of platforms, it could make the industry harder to manage.

There are other remedies. The social-media companies should adjust their
sites to make clearer if a post comes from a friend or a trusted source. They
could accompany the sharing of posts with reminders of the harm from
misinformation. Bots are often used to amplify political messages. Twitter
could disallow the worst—or mark them as such. Most powerfully, they
could adapt their algorithms to put clickbait lower down the feed. Because
these changes cut against a business-model designed to monopolise attention,
they may well have to be imposed by law or by a regulator.

Social media are being abused. But, with a will, society can harness them and
revive that early dream of enlightenment. The stakes for liberal democracy
could hardly be higher.

This article was downloaded by calibre from
https://www.economist.com/news/leaders/21730871-facebook-google-and-twitter-were-
supposed-save-politics-good-information-drove-out/print

| Section menu | Main menu |

| Next | Section menu | Main menu | Previous |

Investigating Russia

Why you should remember Mueller’s job description

He’s not there to pursue Donald Trump or Hillary Clinton, but to safeguard
elections. Surely Americans can unite around that?

Nov 4th 2017

ACCORDING to NATO’s handbook, the preferred tactics in Russian
information warfare can be summarised as “dismiss, distort, distract,
dismay”. That is a fair description of the response in America when Robert
Mueller, the special counsel, unsealed charges against Donald Trump’s
former campaign manager, Paul Manafort, and two others. The president’s
most enthusiastic supporters denounced Mr Mueller, saying he should be
fired or, failing that, redirected to investigate Hillary Clinton instead.
Meanwhile, some of the president’s opponents took Mr Mueller’s move as
the prelude to impeachment. Both views are wrong and unhelpful.

To think clearly about what Mr Mueller is up to, it helps to recall the terms of
his appointment. The special counsel has been told by the Justice Department
to investigate links or co-ordination between the Russian government and

individuals associated with Mr Trump’s presidential campaign, and any other
matters that arise directly from that endeavour. Unlike the three separate
congressional inquiries into Russian government meddling in last year’s
election, Mr Mueller is authorised to prosecute anyone who committed a
federal crime (see article). The purpose of Mr Mueller’s investigation is not
to take down Mr Trump. It is to make it harder for foreign governments to
interfere in future elections.

That is an aim all Americans should be able to unite behind. Instead, Mr
Mueller’s probe has become the latest territory for an uncomprehending
shouting match between partisans. The keyboard warriors at the Internet
Research Agency in St Petersburg, Russia’s best-known troll farm, might like
to imagine that this is all their doing. In reality, though, the Russian meddling
in America which, in the judgment of the intelligence services, took place last
year is now being followed by open season for Americans to turn on each
other.

To gauge the degree of partisan intoxication, recall that, as recently as 2012,
the Republican presidential candidate identified Russia as America’s number
one foreign-policy threat. Mr Trump’s election has turned this on its head.
Republicans are now half as likely to say that Russia poses a big threat to
national security as Democrats are. Around 35% of Republicans express
“confidence” in Vladimir Putin. No, that is not a misprint. The power of
partisan thinking has created a favourable audience for the idea of firing Mr
Mueller.

The Mueller meter

However, getting rid of Mr Mueller would be an act of presidential self-harm
(unless, of course, Mr Trump would suffer even more from the truth coming
out). Had Mr Trump not fired James Comey, Mr Mueller’s successor as head
of the FBI, earlier this year, there would be no special counsel’s
investigation. If the president were to sack Mr Mueller, too, there is a chance
that he would once again set off a chain of events he cannot predict or
control. If Mr Trump acts against Mr Mueller, Congress must reinstate him.

Step back, and the special counsel’s investigation looks like a test case for the
country’s political system. In a staged democracy like Russia’s, someone

who chaired the president’s victorious election campaign would never be
arrested for money-laundering by an independent prosecutor just a year later,
as Mr Manafort has been. Even in America the separation of powers, the
principle that no citizen is above the rule of law, and the integrity of future
elections are all now being put under strain. Roll over on any of them and the
information warriors working for the Kremlin, who want the world to believe
that America’s democratic institutions are no different from Russia’s, really
would have something to celebrate.

This article was downloaded by calibre from
https://www.economist.com/news/leaders/21730879-hes-not-there-pursue-donald-trump-or-
hillary-clinton-safeguard-elections-surely/print

| Section menu | Main menu |

| Next | Section menu | Main menu | Previous |

Modi blues

India’s prime minister focuses too much on appearances

The consequences are beginning to catch up with him

Nov 2nd 2017

THE change in mood is remarkable. Earlier this year Narendra Modi, India’s
prime minister, had an air of invincibility. His government, although more
than halfway into its five-year term, seemed more popular than ever. In
March his Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) won the most lopsided electoral
victory since the 1970s in the country’s most populous state, Uttar Pradesh.
In July he launched a reform that had eluded his predecessors for decades: a
national goods-and-services tax (GST). Later that month he persuaded an ally
of the main opposition party, Congress, to defect to the BJP’s camp, securing
control of yet another state government.

Until recently another landslide at the next national election in 2019 seemed
inevitable. The BJP is still likely to win, but Mr Modi is losing his sheen—
and for that, he has only himself to blame (see article). All governments have
their ups and downs. Mr Modi’s recent setbacks, however, stem in large part

from his preoccupation with presentation over substance.

Start with the economy. Growth has slowed, from 9.1% year-on-year in the
first quarter of last year to 5.7% in the second quarter of this year. That is in
part because of his policy of “demonetisation”, in which 86% of the
banknotes in circulation were abruptly voided. Mr Modi presented it as a
crushing blow to gangsters and tax-dodgers, but in fact it caused great
hardship and disruption, without any clear benefit.

The shambolic implementation of the GST is likely to make matters worse.
The government convened a midnight session of parliament to herald its
adoption—something that had previously been staged only to mark India’s
independence and associated anniversaries. Mr Modi triumphantly declared
the GST a “good and simple tax”. But he did not listen to his own advisers’
suggestions on how to make it so. He plumped for six rates instead of three,
burying small businesses in paperwork and allowing politics to seep into the
rules (the government recently cut the rate on khakras, a popular snack from
his home state of Gujarat, from 12% to 5%). He is now suffering the
consequences, as businessmen across India howl at the complexity.

Unfunny business

It does not help that the government bridles at criticism and harries its critics.
Media firms are anxious not to offend it; journalists who take it on often lose
their jobs. The press has been asking awkward questions about the finances
of a firm owned by the son of Amit Shah, the BJP’s number two; they were
greeted with rebukes from ministers and a lawsuit. Even comedians who
imitate Mr Modi have mysteriously disappeared from the airwaves. The
resulting culture of adulation means that the government’s proposals seldom
receive the sort of scrutiny and debate that might improve them.

In fact, the BJP is not that interested in policy. It offers voters mainly
distraction. The new government in Uttar Pradesh, for example, has painted
buildings and buses saffron—a shade associated with Hinduism—and picked
fights with Muslims, leaving the Taj Mahal (built by a Muslim emperor) off a
list of the state’s main attractions.

The party’s overriding focus is extending its own authority. Earlier this year

the defence minister, Manohar Parrikar, resigned to become chief minister of
the tiny state of Goa. The BJP had lost ground there in recent state elections,
and the allies it needed to form a government insisted they would join it only
if Mr Parrikar, a former chief minister, returned. The finance minister, for
whom making the GST work was apparently not a full-time job, took on the
role of defence minister as well for the next six months—a period of tension
with both China and Pakistan. In other words, a government that prides itself
on its muscular nationalism left defence policy rudderless amid rows with its
main military rivals, simply to retain power in a state with just 0.1% of the
population.

Politically, relentless electioneering has served Mr Modi well. The BJP and
its allies control 18 of India’s 29 states; just one big one is left with Congress.
But the drawbacks, in terms of inept and inconsistent policymaking, are
beginning to tell. There is even talk that the party may have a fight on its
hands in elections in December in Gujarat. If Mr Modi wants to keep winning
votes, he must concentrate not just on campaigns; he must also show that he
knows how to run the country. Sooner or later, voters will tire of
grandstanding.

This article was downloaded by calibre from
https://www.economist.com/news/leaders/21730880-consequences-are-beginning-catch-up-
him-indias-prime-minister-focuses-too-much/print

| Section menu | Main menu |

| Next | Section menu | Main menu | Previous |

Prescription debate

Should regulators block CVS from buying Aetna?

A proposed health-care merger raises difficult antitrust questions

Nov 4th 2017

AMERICA has a competition problem. Market concentration has risen in
more than three-quarters of industries since the late 1990s. Concentration has
led to higher profits and higher returns for shareholders at the expense of
consumers. Antitrust authorities have become more supine: between 1970
and 1999, regulators brought an average of 16 cases a year in order to prevent
big firms from becoming even bigger; between 2000 and 2014, that number
fell below three.

Health care is one of the industries that has been marked by bouts of
consolidation. The annual number of hospital mergers in America doubled
between 2005 and 2015; the national market share of the four largest insurers
went from 74% in 2006 to 83% in 2014. Trustbusters have recently showed
more teeth. In February a federal judge blocked a proposed tie-up between
Aetna and Humana, two health insurers. Antitrust authorities pruned an
acquisition by Walgreens of Rite Aid, America’s second- and fifth-largest
pharmacies respectively.

They may soon face another big test. CVS Health, the largest pharmacy, is
reportedly in talks to buy Aetna for $66bn (see article), in what would be the
country’s biggest-ever health-insurance deal. At first glance, it is hard to see
why trustbusters would wave through this deal if they have balked at others.
But look closer and the picture becomes more complex.

Trustbusters have been clamping down on “horizontal” mergers between
direct rivals, such as Aetna and Humana. The CVS-Aetna deal would be a
different animal. It is an example of “vertical integration”, in which separate
bits of a supply chain are brought together under one roof. This tie-up would
reach across three distinct layers of the health-care industry: the retail
pharmacies for which CVS is famous; the pharmacy-benefit managers
(PBM), intermediaries which negotiate drug prices on behalf of medical plans
and whose number again includes CVS; and the insurers, like Aetna.
Supporters of the deal argue that aligning the interests of insurers and
pharmacies would reduce costs and improve life for consumers. An insurer
that could send patients to walk-in clinics of the sort CVS owns would be
better placed to monitor and improve results.

Antitrust types are usually less worried by the vertical integration of powerful
firms than they are by horizontal mergers between them. The more market
power a firm has, the greater its ability to set prices above the level that
would prevail in a competitive market. If two such firms exist along a supply
chain, prices are inflated at each stage. A tie-up between supplier and
customer can solve this problem of “double marginalisation”. As a result,
vertical integration can achieve lower prices for consumers.

In the case of CVS-Aetna, the incentive for the pharmacy-benefit manager to
fatten its profits would disappear. The question then is would that benefit
accrue to the consumer? That depends on whether firms are dominant in their
respective markets. The benefits to consumers of a vertical merger disappear
if one of the parties has a monopoly. The proposed deal between AT&T; and
Time Warner, for instance, fails this test. The monopoly that AT&T; wields
as a broadband provider in many parts of America means that rivals to Time
Warner have no simple options for getting their content distributed there.
Uncontested markets would have a similar impact on the CVS-Aetna deal: a
combined entity would be free to restrict insured customers to CVS
medications and clinics, for example, if it had no rivals to fear.

Bitter pill or better pill?

That seems unlikely. CVS has about 23% of the pharmacy market, and 24%
of the PBM market; Aetna has about 6% of the insurance market. And more
competition may be on the way in the pharmacy business: the prospective

entry of Amazon lies behind CVS’s hunt for Aetna. But the deal would
require close scrutiny and may need conditions attached. A proposed
agreement with Anthem, another insurer, which would give CVS an even
bigger slice of the PBM pie would need to be ditched. And the local picture
matters. In the median American state, for example, the two largest health
insurers have 66% of the market. Trustbusters might need to insist on the sale
of some local assets to smaller rivals before approving a tie-up.

Make no mistake, America’s competition problem is real, and its messed-up
health-care system would not be fixed by any single deal. But the bar to
blocking a vertical tie-up like CVS-Aetna is high. It is not obvious that this
bar is met.

This article was downloaded by calibre from
https://www.economist.com/news/leaders/21730882-proposed-health-care-merger-raises-
difficult-antitrust-questions-should-regulators-block-cvs/print

| Section menu | Main menu |

| Next | Section menu | Main menu | Previous |

Secessionism in Spain

Time for Mariano Rajoy to think about a new deal for Catalonia

After a month of madness, direct rule from Madrid seems to have been
accepted by Catalans. That opens a window for progress

Nov 2nd 2017

A SECESSIONIST leader flies into exile, seeking protection after being
threatened with a 30-year prison sentence for sedition and rebellion. In the
capital the government takes emergency powers, suspending a regional
parliament after it illegally declares independence, assuming direct control of
its police and civil service. Pinch yourself. This is not some poor, decrepit
country but, incredibly, a modern western European democracy—Spain.

Nobody emerges well from the sorry tale of arrogance, inflexibility and even
violence in Catalonia (see article). Although the immediate crisis seems,
thankfully, to be over, the impact of the October madness will be felt for
years to come. Nearly 2,000 businesses have moved their headquarters out of
Barcelona and other Catalan cities. For many people, Spanish politics has
become harsher and more divisive than at any time since the death of the

dictator, Francisco Franco, in 1975.

How to repair the damage? The first thing is to recognise that there have been
grave faults on both sides. The worst mistakes have been those of Carles
Puigdemont, the president of Catalonia until he was removed on October
27th. His extra-constitutional referendum, held on October 1st, was legally
flawed even in its own terms, conceived without proper Catalan
parliamentary debate. In the brief campaign Mr Puigdemont failed to explain
how independence would come about, falsely suggesting that Catalonia could
swiftly become an EU member. That idea has been shot down in Brussels.
Finally, he issued a hollow declaration of independence, even though it was
clear that this would force the hand of the central government in Madrid.
Having cooked up a mess, Mr Puigdemont has fled the scene and left others
to clean it up.

But the Spanish government has made mistakes, too. Mariano Rajoy, the
prime minister, inflamed the situation on October 1st, when he sent in police
to break up Mr Puigdemont’s referendum, injuring peaceful Catalans taking
part in a democratic exercise that he would have been better advised to
ignore. Although he was right to respond to the declaration of independence
by suspending the Catalan government, the attempt by the attorney-general to
threaten Mr Puigdemont with a long prison term is another error. Mr Rajoy is
also guilty of the original blunder that set the course for today’s collision.
Back in 2006, when he was leader of the opposition, he demanded revisions
to Catalonia’s autonomy statute, rolling back concessions that had given the
Catalan language preferential status and had defined Catalonia as a nation.
The resulting sense of betrayal galvanised the secessionists.

Of late, Mr Rajoy has learned to temper his firmness. He has sought
consensus with opposition parties in Madrid and expressed a readiness to
review the constitution. In reimposing central authority on Catalonia, he
ensured that direct rule would be as short as possible by calling a snap
election for December 21st, sparing Catalonia’s streets from protests.

Mr Rajoy now has a valuable breathing space before December’s vote. He
must use it. The causes of the discontent will not suddenly disappear. A large
minority of Catalans are unhappy with the current dispensation and want to
break away. So a political solution is needed, not merely a legal one. Mr

Rajoy needs to sketch out the contours of a new deal he could offer in future
talks. They will take time and the courage to confront his own party; any new
constitutional settlement will have to involve all of Spain. For now, Mr Rajoy
should indicate a willingness to offer concessions in those talks, These could
include something like a return to the 2006 statute; mechanisms to let
Catalonia, one of Spain’s wealthiest regions, keep more of its tax revenues;
and the possibility of a future referendum on independence after a new deal
has been concluded.

How to support loyalists

Some will say that talk of concessions would reward bad behaviour. In fact, it
would give voice to the majority of Catalans who want to remain in Spain.
That is what Britain did with Scotland and Canada with Quebec. If Mr Rajoy
can woo the decisive middle ground—the perhaps one-third of Catalans who
want reform rather than secession—he will handily see off the separatists at
the ballot box. If not, they might even win again, and claim another victory
for independence. That could portend an even deeper crisis after December.

This article was downloaded by calibre from
https://www.economist.com/news/leaders/21730876-after-month-madness-direct-rule-
madrid-seems-have-been-accepted-catalans/print

| Section menu | Main menu |

| Next section | Main menu | Previous section |

Letters

On inflation, land reform, Britain, Johannes Vermeer,
women, beer: Letters to the editor [Thu, 02 Nov 23:23]

| Next section | Main menu | Previous section |

| Next | Section menu | Main menu |

Letters

Letters to the editor

On inflation, land reform, Britain, Johannes Vermeer, women, beer

Nov 2nd 2017
Letters are welcome and should be addressed to the Editor at
letters@economist.com

When the price is right

You are right to argue that it would be clever for central banks to adopt a
temporary price-level target if inflation is too low, the lower bound on
interest rates has been reached and a recession hits (Free exchange, October
21st). That idea first came from William White, a former economic adviser at
the Bank for International Settlements, and figures prominently in the bank’s
69th annual report, from June 1999.

Bill wrote the report with the assistance of a staff team (I helped him with the
chapter on monetary policy). He was worried that falling prices in Japan
would engender expectations of further price declines and raise real interest

rates. To shift expectations, he argued that central banks should make up any
price shortfalls by switching to a price-level target. To be credible, the
possibility of such a switch would have to be announced well in advance of
prices falling.

Although Bill is best known for warning before the financial crisis that rapid
credit growth, rising leverage and opaque markets would end in tears, those
who worked for him can testify that that was only one of his many insightful
analyses.

STEFAN GERLACH
Former deputy-governor at the Central Bank of Ireland
Zurich

Land reform in Asia

Noting the connection between equitable, high-yield household farming and
successful economic development, Banyan (October 14th) lauded Japan for
its early and peaceful land-reform programme in 1945 and 1946, carried out
under American occupation.

In that same period North Korea conducted what was at first a very

successful, and peaceful, land-reform programme using little more than the
remarkable persuasive powers of Kim Il Sung. If and when Kim Jong Un
resolves the political challenges that face his country, and continues incipient
moves to de-collectivise agriculture and return to the high-yield household
farming his grandfather started with, it is likely that agriculture will underpin
another of those growth “miracles” that Banyan praised.

In Ethiopia and Rwanda, meanwhile, land reforms and infrastructural,
extension and financing support for high-yield household farming are
underpinning the best development stories in Africa today.

JOE STUDWELL
Cambridge, Cambridgeshire

Land reform has indeed played an important role in Asia’s leading
development successes, including, as Banyan observed, Japan, Taiwan, South
Korea and mainland China. But the list is not complete without Vietnam,
where the successful “land to the tiller” programme in the south from 1970 to
1973 ultimately led the pragmatists to break up all collective farms.

The resulting agriculture dominated by small farmers showed farm
productivity and income gains similar to those in China.

ROY PROSTERMAN
Founder
Landesa
Seattle

Efficiency test

I would venture that the current Mr Bagehot confuses his predecessor’s
“efficient” element of the British constitution—the prime minister,
government ministries and so on—with smooth administration (Bagehot,
October 21st). In 1877, the year that Walter Bagehot died, Irish nationalists
embarked on a political quest for Irish home rule that over the next 50 years
reflected the deeply held aspirations of a large portion of the Irish population.
This was something that the “efficient” part of the constitution proved unable
to resolve, leading to non-parliamentary and sometimes violent means to find
a partial solution.

Today, some political issues require big answers. Managing the status quo is
sometimes not enough, and an unsustainable status quo needs to be remade.
The Brexit referendum was another extra-parliamentary action that involved
the widest participation by the public on an issue of profound constitutional
importance, one which the efficient machinery of government also had not
been able to solve.

JONATHAN MOORE
London

Rescued from obscurity

The mistaken notion of Johannes Vermeer as an isolated genius cannot
simply be ascribed to “a 19th-century art-historian” who nicknamed him “the
Sphinx of Delft” (“Answering the riddle”, October 14th). The anonymous
art-historian in question was in fact Théophile Thoré, a political journalist, art
critic and historian best-known for his rediscovery of Vermeer.

His pioneering research into Vermeer began in the late 1850s during his exile
from France at a time when only about five or six paintings securely
attributed to Vermeer were generally known. Recognising Vermeer’s
exceptional artistic qualities, Thoré was puzzled that so few paintings were
identified and that virtually nothing was known about his life. This
mysterious paucity of information about Vermeer led to Thoré’s sobriquet
mon Sphinx.

Thoré’s championing of the artist prompted the rise in Vermeer’s
posthumous historical and critical fortunes, but he never presented Vermeer
as a lone genius, isolated from his contemporaries. On the contrary, Thoré
studied Vermeer in the context of other 17th-century Dutch genre painters,
such as Gabriël Metsu, Gerard ter Borch and Pieter de Hooch. The difference
was that many of Vermeer’s superb paintings had been variously wrongly

 
attributed to these contemporaries, and his identity had become unjustly
neglected. Vermeer was an exceptional artist, but not a lone genius.

FRANCES SUZMAN JOWELL
Independent art-historian
London

Equal before the law

The news about the sexual abuse of women in the workplace (“Sex and
power”, October 21st) made me reflect on an initiative that male politicians
in America might want to reconsider to show the other half that we’re
disgusted by what’s happening: reintroduce the proposed Equal Rights
Amendment to the constitution. This was front-page news in the 1970s,
passing Congress but just falling shy of ratification in the states. It declares
that “Equality of rights under the law shall not be denied or abridged by the
United States or any state on account of sex.” Its time is now.

PAUL FEINER
Greenburgh, New York

A lifestyle choice

Oliver Reif remarked that “telling Americans to buy fewer guns is like telling
Germans to drink less beer” (Letters, October 14th). Germans are drinking
less beer. From 1980 to 2016 annual consumption per head drooped from 146
litres to 104. This probably isn’t because of exceptionally rational behaviour
on the part of Germans. I guess it is rather a lifestyle issue. Maybe that’s the
angle to try for reducing gun deaths in America as well.

KARL BARTELS
Potsdam, Germany

This article was downloaded by calibre from
https://www.economist.com/news/letters/21730860-inflation-land-reform-britain-
johannes-vermeer-women-beer-letters-editor/print

| Section menu | Main menu |

| Next section | Main menu | Previous section |

Briefing

Social media and politics: How the world was trolled [Thu, 02 Nov

23:23]

| Next section | Main menu | Previous section |

| Next | Section menu | Main menu |

Less Euromaidan, more Gamergate

Once considered a boon to democracy, social media have started to look
like its nemesis

An economy based on attention is easily gamed

Nov 4th 2017 | NEW YORK, SAN FRANCISCO AND WASHINGTON,
DC

“COME on guys, let’s be serious. If you really want to do something, don’t
just ‘like’ this post. Write that you are ready, and we can try to start
something.” Mustafa Nayem, a Ukrainian journalist, typed those words into
his Facebook account on the morning of November 21st 2013. Within an
hour his post had garnered 600 comments. That prompted Mr Nayem to write
again, calling on his followers to gather later that day on the Maidan square
in Kiev. Three months later Ukraine’s president, Viktor Yanukovych, was
removed.

At the time, this did not seem all that remarkable. From the protests around
the Iranian elections of 2009 onwards, the role of Facebook and Twitter in
political uprisings in dodgy countries had been prominent and celebrated. The

social-media-fuelled movements often failed, in the end, to achieve much;
five months before Mr Nayem put up his post the army had reestablished its
power in Egypt, where social media had been crucial to the downfall of
General Hosni Mubarak in 2011. But the idea had taken hold that, by
connecting people and giving them a voice, social media had become a global
force for plurality, democracy and progress.

A few months after the “Euromaidan” protests brought down Mr
Yanukovych, a less widely noticed story provided a more disturbing insight
into the potential political uses of social media. In August 2014 Eron Gjoni, a
computer scientist in America, published a long, rambling blog post about his
relationship with Zoe Quinn, a computer-game developer, appearing to imply
she had slept with a journalist to get favourable coverage of her new game,
“Depression Quest”. The post was the epicentre of “Gamergate”, a
misogynistic campaign in which mostly white men keen to bolster each
other’s egos let rip against feminists and all the other “social justice warriors”
they despised in the world of gaming and beyond. According to some
estimates, more than 2m messages with the hashtag #gamergate were sent in
September and October 2014.

The campaign used the entire spectrum of social-media tools. Videos, articles
and documents leaked to embarrass enemies—a practice known as doxing—
were posted to YouTube and blogs. Twitter and Facebook circulated memes.
Most people not directly involved were able to ignore it; crucially, the
mainstream media, when they noticed it, misinterpreted it. They took
Gamergate to be a serious debate, in which both sides deserved to be heard,
rather than a right-wing bullying campaign.

Looking at the role that social media have played in politics in the past
couple of years, it is the fake-news squalor of Gamergate, not the activist
idealism of the Euromaidan, which seems to have set the tone. In Germany
the far-right Alternative for Germany party won 12.6% of parliamentary seats
in part because of fears and falsehoods spread on social media, such as the
idea that Syrian refugees get better benefits than native Germans. In Kenya
weaponised online rumours and fake news have further eroded trust in the
country’s political system.

This is freaking some people out. In 2010 Wael Ghonim, an entrepreneur and

fellow at Harvard University, was one of the administrators of a Facebook
page called “We are all Khaled Saeed”, which helped spark the Egyptian
uprising centred on Tahrir Square. “We wanted democracy,” he says today,
“but got mobocracy.” Fake news spread on social media is one of the
“biggest political problems facing leaders around the world”, says Jim
Messina, a political strategist who has advised several presidents and prime
ministers.

Governments simply do not know how to deal with this—except, that is, for
those that embrace it. In the Philippines President Rodrigo Duterte relies on a
“keyboard army” to disseminate false narratives. His counterpart in South
Africa, Jacob Zuma, also benefits from the protection of trolls. And then
there is Russia, which has both a long history of disinformation campaigns
and a domestic political culture largely untroubled by concerns of truth. It has
taken to the dark side of social media like a rat to a drainpipe, not just for
internal use, but for export, too.

Vladimir Putin’s regime has used social media as part of surreptitious
campaigns in its neighbours, including Ukraine, in France and Germany, in
America and elsewhere. At outfits like the Internet Research Agency
professional trolls work 12-hour shifts. Russian hackers set up bots by the
thousand to keep Twitter well fed with on-message tweets (they have recently
started to tweet assiduously in support of Catalan independence). Sputnik and
RT, the government-controlled news agency and broadcaster, respectively,
provide stories for the apparatus to spread (during the French election this
year Sputnik reported on a totally fictitious poll purporting to put
conservative candidate François Fillon at the head of the field).

These stories and incendiary posts bounce between social networks,
including Facebook, its subsidiary Instagram, and Twitter. They often
perform better than content from real people and media companies. Bots
generated one out of every five political messages posted on Twitter in
America’s presidential campaign last year. The RAND Corporation, a think-
tank, calls this integrated, purposeful system a “firehose of falsehood”.

On November 1st representatives of Facebook, Google and Twitter fielded
hostile questions on Capitol Hill about the role they played in helping that
firehose drench American voters. The hearings were triggered by reports that

during the 2016 campaign Russian-controlled entities bought ads and posted
content about divisive political issues that spread virally, in an attempt to sow
discord. Facebook has estimated that Russian content on its network,
including posts and paid ads, reached 126m Americans, around 40% of the
nation’s population.

Given the concentration of power in the market—Facebook and Google
account for about 40% of America’s digital content consumption, according
to Brian Wieser of Pivotal Research, a data provider—such questions are
well worth worrying about. But the concerns about social media run deeper
than the actions of specific firms or particular governments.

Social media are a mechanism for capturing, manipulating and consuming
attention unlike any other. That in itself means that power over those media
—be it the power of ownership, of regulation or of clever hacking—is of
immense political importance. Regardless of specific agendas, though, it
seems to many that the more information people consume through these
media, the harder it will become to create a shared, open space for political
discussion—or even to imagine that such a place might exist.

Years ago Jürgen Habermas, a noted German philosopher, suggested that
while the connectivity of social media might destabilise authoritarian
countries, it would also erode the public sphere in democracies. James
Williams, a doctoral student at Oxford University and a former Google
employee, now claims that “digital technologies increasingly inhibit our
ability to pursue any politics worth having.” To save democracy, he argues,
“we need to reform our attention economy.”

The idea of the attention economy is not new. “What information consumes
is rather obvious: it consumes the attention of its recipients,” Herbert Simon,
a noted economist, wrote in 1971. A “wealth of information,” he added,
“creates a poverty of attention.” In “The Attention Merchants”, published in
2016, Tim Wu of Columbia University explains how 20th-century media
companies hoovered up ever more of this scarce resource for sale to
advertisers, and how Google and its ilk have continued the process.

What are you paying with?

Social media have revolutionised this attention economy in two ways. The
first is quantitative. New services and devices have penetrated every nook
and cranny of life, sucking up more and more time (see chart 1). The second
is qualitative. The new opportunity to share things with the world has made
people much more active solicitors of attention, and this has fundamentally
shifted the economy’s dynamics.

Interface designers, app-makers and social-media firms employ armies of
designers to keep people coming back, according to Tristan Harris, another

ex-Googler and co-founder of an advocacy group called “Time Well Spent”.
Notifications signalling new followers or new e-mails beg to be tapped on.
The now ubiquitous “pull-to-refresh” feature, which lets users check for new
content, has turned smartphones into slot machines.

Adult Americans who use Facebook, Instagram and WhatsApp spend around
20 hours a month on the three services. Overall, Americans touch their
smartphones on average more than 2,600 times a day (the heaviest users
easily double that). The population of America farts about 3m times a minute.
It likes things on Facebook about 4m times a minute.

The average piece of content is looked at for only a few seconds. But it is the
overall paying of attention, not the specific information, that matters. The
more people use their addictive-by-design social media, the more attention
social-media companies can sell to advertisers—and the more data about the
users’ behaviour they can collect for themselves. It is an increasingly
lucrative business to be in. On November 1st Facebook posted record
quarterly profits, up nearly 80% on the same quarter last year. Combined,
Facebook and Alphabet, Google’s parent company, control half the world’s
digital advertising.

In general, the nature or meaning of the information being delivered does not
matter all that much, as long as some attention is being paid. But there is one
quality on which the system depends: that information gets shared.

People do not share content solely because it is informative. They share
information because they want attention for themselves, and for what the
things they share say about them. They want to be heard and seen, and
respected. They want posts to be liked, tweets to be retweeted. Some types of
information spread more easily this way than others; they pass through
social-media networks like viruses—a normally pathological trait which the
social-media business is set up to reward.

Because of the data they collect, social-media companies have a good idea of
what sort of things go viral, and how to tweak a message until it does. They
are willing to share such insights with clients—including with political
campaigns versed in the necessary skills, or willing to buy them. The Leave
campaign in Britain’s 2016 Brexit referendum was among the pioneers. It

served about 1bn targeted digital advertisements, mostly on Facebook,
experimenting with different versions and dropping ineffective ones. The
Trump campaign in 2016 did much the same, but on a much larger scale: on
an average day it fed Facebook between 50,000 and 60,000 different versions
of its advertisements, according to Brad Parscale, its digital director. Some
were aimed at just a few dozen voters in a particular district.

Perhaps the most subversive techniques, though, are those developed in
somewhat obsessive and technically astute coteries of amateurs whose main
motivation is fun and recognition, sometimes—but not necessarily—spiked
with malice. The internet has always benefited from the attention of such
people. In an article entitled “Hacking the Attention Economy” danah boyd
(she spells her name in lower case letters), the president of Data & Society, a
think-tank, looks at their impact on social media.

In the mid-2000s members of 4chan, a messaging board first used to share
manga, anime and pornography, started to explore new ways to manipulate
nascent social media. They took particular pleasure in generating “memes”:
funny images—often of cats, combined with a clever caption (a genre known
as LOLcats)—which could spread like wildfire. They gamed online polls
such as the one organised by Time to find the world’s most important people.
Ms boyd describes the ways in which such hacks turned political. On and
around 4chan, groups which had mostly been excluded from the mainstream
media, from white nationalists to men’s rights activists, developed the dark
arts they would use to further their agendas. Gamergate was their coming-out
party.

The pressure to go vegan

To work at the level of the population as a whole, such social-media
operations cannot stand alone. They need mechanisms which can amplify
messages developed online, provide the illusion of objectivity, and validate
people’s beliefs. Analysis of sharing on Twitter and Facebook, and direct
links between stories, shows that a specific subset of America’s media now
performs this role for the country’s right wing. Centred on Breitbart, a
publication now again run by Steve Bannon, a former adviser to President
Donald Trump, and Fox News, a cable channel, this “ecosystem” includes
hundreds of other online-only news sites, from Conservapedia, a right-wing

Wikipedia, to Infowars, which peddles conspiracy theories. There is a left-
wing media ecosystem, too, but it is much less diversified and dominated by
mainstream publications, such as the New York Times and CNN.

In France the right-wing ecosystem is called the fachosphere and includes
such sites as Fdesouche and Égalité et Réconciliation. Nearly half the links
shared during the presidential campaign led to “alternative” sources,
according to Bakamo.Social, a consultancy. Although smaller, Germany’s
right-wing Paralleluniversum, populated by the likes of Epoch Times and
Kopp Online, is gaining ground, says Stiftung Neue Verantwortung, a think-
tank.

Such ecosystems are a symptom of political polarisation. They also drive it
further. The algorithms that Facebook, YouTube and others use to maximise
“engagement” ensure users are more likely to see information that they are
liable to interact with. This tends to lead them into clusters of like-minded
people sharing like-minded things, and can turn moderate views into more
extreme ones. “It’s like you start as a vegetarian and end up as a vegan,” says
Zeynep Tufekci of the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill,
describing her experience following the recommendations on YouTube.
These effects are part of what is increasing America’s political polarisation,
she argues (see chart 2).

When putting these media ecosystems to political purposes, various tools are
useful. Humour is one. It spreads well; it also differentiates the in-group from
the out-group; how you feel about the humour, especially if it is in
questionable taste, binds you to one or the other. The best tool, though, is
outrage. This is because it feeds on itself; the outrage of others with whom
one feels fellowship encourages one’s own. This shared outrage reinforces
the fellow feeling; a lack of appropriate outrage marks you out as not
belonging. The reverse is also true. Going into the enemy camp and posting
or tweeting things that cause them outrage—trolling, in other words—is a
great way of getting attention.

Outrage and humour are thus politically powerful; indeed, they played big
roles in mobilisations such as that of Tahrir Square and the Euromaidan.
They are also easily integrated into rumour campaigns, such as the one about
Hillary Clinton’s health in 2016. In August 2016 far-right bloggers started
circulating theories that she was suffering from seizures and was physically
weak but that, outrageously, the Democrats and their allies in the mainstream
media were covering this up.

Video clips mocking her past coughing fits made the rounds online.
Conservative media, such as the Drudge Report and Fox News, picked up the
story, mainly by asking there’s-smoke-is-there-fire questions. From there it
made it into more liberal mainstream outlets. Ms Clinton saw herself
compelled to deny the rumours—only to see them gain strength when she
indeed developed pneumonia. As the campaign went on, the amount of play
such stories got on social media increased (see chart 3).

It would be easy to dismiss such hacks as mere pranks, as misfits showing off
their hacking capabilities to one another and the world, just as they did ten
years ago on 4chan. But backed up by an alternative media ecosystem keen to
support them, and with judicious help from foreign powers capable of
organising themselves a little more thoroughly than ragtag mobocrats, they
can become powerful. Although the facts quickly supersede the fictions, once
an idea is out there, it tends to linger. Efforts to debunk fake news often don’t
spread as far, or through the same networks: indeed, they may well be
ignored because they come from mainstream media, which many no longer

trust. And even if they are not, they are never as engaging as the rumours
they seek to replace.

The biggest attention hacker is none other than Mr Trump himself. When he
sends one of his outrageous tweets, often adroitly timed to distract from some
other controversy, the world pays pathological levels of attention. The
president is today’s attention economy made flesh. He reads as little as
possible, gets most of his news from cable television, retweets with minimal
thought, and his humour makes it very clear what in-group he is in with.
Above all, he loves outrage—both causing it and feeling it.

Being this thoroughly part of the system makes Mr Trump eminently
hackable. His staff, it is said, compete to try and get ideas they want him to
take on board into media they know he will be exposed to. Outsiders can play
the game, too. In 2015 enterprising enemies set up a Twitter bot dedicated to
sending him tweets with unattributed quotes from Benito Mussolini, Italy’s
fascist dictator. Last year Mr Trump finally retweeted one: “It is better to live
one day as a lion than 100 years as a sheep.” Cue Trump-is-a-fascist outrage.

The tension of history

Social media are hardly the first communication revolution to first threaten,
then rewire the body politic. The printing press did it (see our essay on
Luther). So did television and radio, allowing conformity to be imposed in
authoritarian countries at the same time as, in more open ones, promoting the
norms of discourse which enabled the first mass democracies.

In those democracies broadcasters were often strictly regulated on the basis
that the airwaves they used were a public good of limited capacity. One
strong argument for not regulating the internet, heard a lot in the 1990s, was
that this scarcity of spectrum no longer applied—the internet’s capacity was
limitless. Seeing things through the lens of the attention economy, though,
suggests that this distinction may not be as sharp as once it seemed. As
Simon said, people’s attention—for which, in internet-speak, bandwidth is
often used as a metaphor—is scarce.

But there is a raft of problems with justifying greater regulation on these
grounds. One is ignorance, and the risk of perverse outcomes that flows from

it. As Rasmus Nielsen of Oxford and Roskilde universities argues, not
enough is known about the inner workings of social media to come up with
effective regulations.

This is in part the fault of the tech companies, which have been less than
generous with information about their business. For a firm which used to say
its mission was to make the world more open and connected, Facebook is
strikingly closed and isolated. It collaborates with researchers looking at the
dynamics of social media, but only allows them to publish results, not
underlying data. It has been even less willing than Google to share details
about how it decides to recommend content or target ads. Both firms have
also lobbied to avoid disclosure rules for political ads that conventional
media have to comply with, arguing that digital ads lack the space to make
clear who paid for a campaign.

Correctly perceiving that public opinion is turning, the companies now say
they will be more forthcoming. Facebook and Twitter have volunteered to
show the source of any ads that appear in subscribers’ news feeds and
develop tools so people can see all the ads that the social-media companies
serve to their customers. Whether that is enough to head off legislation
remains to be seen: in America a group of senators has introduced the

“Honest Ads Act”, which would extend the rules that apply to print, radio and
television to social media. Proponents hope it will become law before the
2018 mid-term election.

Some, such as Mr Ghonim, the former Egyptian activist, say that the “Honest
Ads Act” does not go far enough. He wants Facebook and other big social-
media platforms to be required to maintain a public feed that provides a
detailed overview of the information distributed on their networks, such as
how far a piece of content has spread and which sorts of users have seen it.
“This would allow us to see what is really happening on these platforms,”
says Mr Ghonim. Such demands for transparency would extend to
requirements to label bots and fake accounts, so users can understand who is
behind a message.

Other proposals go beyond transparency. Increased friction is one suggestion,
offering users pop-ups with warnings along the lines of: “Do you really want
to share this? This news item has been found to be false.” Social-media firms
could also start redirecting people to calmer content after they have been
engaging with stories that are negative or hostile. YouTube has experimented
with redirecting jihadists away from extremist videos to content that
contradicts what they have been watching.

Other proposals aim less at dynamics, more at content. As of this October
Germany has required social-media companies to take down hate speech,
such as Holocaust denial, and fake news within 24 hours or face fines of up
to €50m ($58m). The sheer volume of content—more than 500,000
comments are posted on Facebook every minute—makes such policing hard.
It is possible, though, that a mixture of better algorithms and more people
could achieve something. Facebook has already agreed to hire a few thousand
people for this task; it may need a lot more.

Free-speech advocates cringe at the thought that Facebook should be allowed
to become the “ministry of truth”—or, for that matter, that companies might
surreptitiously steer users activity to quieten them down when they have been
angry. As Mr Habermas argues, there is a real value to the openness social
media and the internet can bring in restrictive societies. And being angry and
unsettled—even outraged—should be a part of that. Some point to China,
where it is reported that more than 2m moderators, most employed by social-

media firms, scour the networks, erring on the side of caution when they see
something that may displease official censors.

A more far-out proposal, which Ms Tufekci favours, is to require social-
media firms to change their business model in some way, making their
money, perhaps, directly from users, rather than from advertisers. Others
argue that the social-media platforms which dominate the attention economy
have become utilities and should no longer be run as profit-maximising
companies. Mr Wu, the author of “The Attention Merchants”, wants
Facebook to become a “public benefit corporation”, obliged by law to aid the
public. Wikipedia, an online encyclopedia, could be seen as the model: it
lives off donations and its host of volunteers keeps it reasonably clean, honest
and reliable. None of this, though, offers a truly satisfactory response to the
problem.

Another of Mussolini’s sayings—not yet retweeted by Mr Trump—was that
“Democracy is beautiful in theory; in practice it is a fallacy.” As with his
preference for the leonine over the sheepish, it is sometimes hard not to
sympathise with this, at least a bit. But if, like all political systems,
democracy has proved eminently fallible, it has shown itself robustly superior
to the rest when it comes to fixing those failings and making good when
faced by change. On that basis, history suggests it should be able to weather
the storms of social media. But it will not be easy. And, as with books and
broadcasts, the process is likely to transform, at least in part, that which it
seeks to preserve.

This article was downloaded by calibre from
https://www.economist.com/news/briefing/21730870-economy-based-attention-easily-gamed-
once-considered-boon-democracy-social-media/print

| Section menu | Main menu |

| Next section | Main menu | Previous section |

United States

23:23]

Tax reform: Deducting deductions [Thu, 02 Nov 23:23]
Terrorism in New York: A faint echo [Thu, 02 Nov 23:23]
Robert Mueller’s investigation: Manafort overboard [Thu, 02 Nov
High-stakes health care: Chipped away [Thu, 02 Nov 23:23]
Hasidic Jews in upstate New York: The parting of Monroe
Texas politics: Thus spake Joe [Thu, 02 Nov 23:23]
Lexington: The great switcheroo [Thu, 02 Nov 23:23]

[Thu, 02 Nov 23:23]

| Next section | Main menu | Previous section |

| Next | Section menu | Main menu |

Deducting deductions

Republicans are struggling to find money to pay for tax cuts

Scrapping the state and local tax deduction will be difficult. But it is a good
idea

Nov 2nd 2017 | WASHINGTON, DC

REPUBLICANS have spent years talking about the need to cut and simplify
taxes. In June 2016 Paul Ryan, the Speaker of the House of Representatives,
released a plan to do so. President Donald Trump released no fewer than
three tax plans during his campaign for office. In September the
administration championed an outline sketch it had agreed with Republican
leaders in Congress. Yet as The Economist went to press, Republicans had
delayed the release of their tax bill by a day, having failed to iron out the
details.

The main problem the party will face as the legislation moves through
Congress is finding the money to pay for tax cuts. Republicans like to talk
about abolishing tax deductions, but every loophole has a lobbyist to defend
it. Having given up on deficit-neutral reform, Congress has budgeted for the

tax package to increase the deficit by $1.5trn. But the Tax Policy Centre, a
think-tank, puts the likely cost of the package $2.4trn. The main source of
revenue Republicans hope to bank comes from scrapping the “state and
local” deduction. This exempts, from federal taxes, money used to pay state
and local tax bills. Even getting rid of this is proving difficult.

As long as there have been federal income taxes, there has been a state and
local deduction. It first appeared in the Revenue Act of 1862, which financed
the civil war, according to Jared Walczak of the Tax Foundation, a think-
tank. Federal income tax was eventually found to be unconstitutional. When,
after a constitutional amendment, lawmakers recreated it in 1913, they
recreated the deduction, too. The idea was to stop the federal government
from monopolising states’ tax revenue.

Republicans have since come to view the state and local deduction as
something that encourages big government, rather than deterring it. It
subsidises Democratic-leaning states that set their taxes high. (In New York
the deduction is worth about 9% of taxable incomes, compared with just
2.5% in Texas.) In 1985 President Ronald Reagan proposed getting rid of the
deduction, while acknowledging its status as “the most sacred of cows” in the
tax code.

Oiling the wheels

Yet the deduction survived Reagan’s tax reform in 1986. Lawmakers from
highly taxed states formed an unlikely alliance with the oil lobby, which was
concerned about losing its own tax breaks. Each special interest supported the
other. The state and local deduction stayed, and the oil lobby won some
concessions.

Will today’s Republicans succeed where Reagan failed? An analysis by
Bloomberg in September found that there are 52 Republican lawmakers
whose constituents benefit disproportionately from the deduction. Concern
about scrapping it is one reason the Republican’s budget outline, which
opened the door to tax reform, only squeaked through the House by four
votes (Republicans have a majority of 45). In an attempt to pacify dissenters,
Kevin Brady, chairman of the Ways & Means committee, has since proposed
keeping the deduction in place for property taxes.

That would reshape, rather than eliminate, the distorted incentives the
deduction causes. These are twofold. First, the deduction encourages states to
tax and spend more than they otherwise might, because when they do, some
of the costs fall on the federal taxpayers. Second, in its current form the
deduction encourages states to use property and income taxes when sales
taxes might be better. (Taxpayers can only deduct one of income and sales
taxes, and generally it is easier and more beneficial to pick income taxes.)

Property taxes account for about one-third of state and local deductions
taken, by cost. Whereas seven states have no income tax at all, all 50 levy
significant property taxes, so the benefits of this part of the deduction are
more spread around. Maintaining it would disproportionately benefit some
Republican-leaning states like Texas. But that limits the attraction of Mr
Brady’s offer to Republican lawmakers from Democratic-leaning states like
California, New York and New Jersey.

Eliminating the state and local deduction would, all else equal, make federal
taxes more progressive. In 2014 nearly 90% of the benefits of the state and
local deduction as a whole flowed to those with incomes over $100,000. The
deduction’s regressive effects has more to do with income than property
taxes, according to the Tax Foundation. This is because as high-earners get
richer, they tend to pay a higher proportion of their earnings in local income
taxes, but a lower proportion on property taxes. So the deduction for income
taxes is more important to them.

Despite its regressive nature, many on the left like the state and local
deduction, income taxes included. The Centre on Budget and Policy
Priorities, a left-leaning think-tank, argues that the deduction makes it
politically easier for states to levy higher taxes on the rich, thereby increasing
government spending. Moreover, local taxes fund services such as education
and roads, which are already under strain because of tight budgets.

Yet states are surely capable of balancing their budgets without receiving a
federal subsidy for doing so. There is no real justification for distorting their
fiscal decisions one way or the other. For that reason, the Republicans’ final
tax bill will be better if it curbs the state and local deduction. And a partial
repeal would be better than none at all.

This article was downloaded by calibre from https://www.economist.com/news/united-
states/21730909-scrapping-state-and-local-tax-deduction-will-be-difficult-it-
good/print

| Section menu | Main menu |

| Next | Section menu | Main menu | Previous |

Terrorism

New York is attacked again, but remains remarkably safe

The changing method used suggests the NYPD is doing its job pretty well

Nov 2nd 2017 | NEW YORK

JUST a few blocks away from where around 2,750 people were killed on
September 11th 2001, New York suffered another deadly attack on October
31st. This time the attacker used a low-tech, less lethal method, illustrating
how the threat from terrorism is changing. Children were about to be
dismissed from school and tourists were enjoying the afternoon sun when
Sayfullo Saipov, a 29-year-old immigrant from Uzbekistan, mounted the curb
in a pickup truck and drove along the pedestrian and cycle path between the
West Side highway and the Hudson River, hitting people on the mile-long
stretch. He rammed into a school bus, injuring those inside. In all he killed
eight people. Most were tourists from Argentina.

Ray Kelly, New York’s former police commissioner, told NPR, a radio
station, that he was surprised this had not happened before, “because it is so
easy to do”. The incident mimicked recent attacks in Europe, in which

vehicles were used as weapons. Ever since Islamic State (IS) encouraged
supporters living in the West to use this method, the NYPD has been
preparing. Barriers had been placed around soft targets, including Times
Square. The NYPD worked with truck-rental companies, visiting 150
locations to talk about suspicious signs. After the attacks in Nice and Berlin,
the police repeated those visits.

The NYPD has invested heavily in counter-terrorism. It has posted detectives
to Abu Dhabi, Amman, London and elsewhere. Among the rank-and-file are
speakers of Arabic, Dari, Urdu and Pushtu. Some 500 officers are trained in
behaviour analysis and how to detect explosives and radiation. Hundreds
more are assigned to counter-terrorism units. The city has been the target of
about two dozen plots. Most have been foiled by police and intelligence
agents, or by civilians who spoke up when they saw something suspicious.

Despite those efforts at vigilance, the driver appears to have hired a truck
easily. Authorities say it appears he acted alone. Big plans with multiple
plotters who chat and can be monitored are easier to foil than low-tech ones
by lone wolves. One recent plot that aimed to kill thousands and make an
“ocean out of their blood” by targeting Times Square and the subway was
thwarted by an undercover agent. John Miller, who heads up the NYPD’s
intelligence arm, says that Mr Saipov has never been part of an NYPD or FBI
investigation. Mr Saipov appears to have closely followed IS instructions on
how to carry out such an attack. Police found notes written in Arabic near the
truck which indicate he had declared allegiance to IS. Andrew Cuomo, New
York’s governor, told CNN that Mr Saipov became “radicalised
domestically”. After spells in Ohio and Florida, he settled with his wife and
children in Patterson, New Jersey, about 20 miles from New York City. He
worked for Uber, the ride-hailing firm, which said that he had passed all its
background checks.

Unlike in 2001, when politicians came together, the attack was quickly
politicised. President Donald Trump tweet-ordered the Department of
Homeland Security to step up its vetting process and picked a fight with
Chuck Schumer, New York’s senior senator. Mr Cuomo said Mr Trump’s
tweets were unhelpful. They play “into the hands of the terrorists”, he said.
“The tone now should be the exact opposite.”

This article was downloaded by calibre from https://www.economist.com/news/united-
states/21730901-changing-method-used-suggests-nypd-doing-its-job-pretty-well-new-
york/print

| Section menu | Main menu |

| Next | Section menu | Main menu | Previous |

Manafort overboard

Donald Trump’s former campaign chief is indicted

Cue calls to jail Hillary Clinton

Nov 4th 2017 | WASHINGTON, DC

BLAME it on “The Godfather”. For days the political village in Washington,
DC has been consumed by the wrong argument about Robert Mueller, the
special counsel tasked with investigating Russian interference in the 2016
election. It began on October 30th when Mr Mueller, a former FBI boss,
unveiled his first criminal charges against members of Donald Trump’s
presidential campaign. Partisans and pundits responded by squabbling about
who is the bigger villain: Mr Trump, or his erstwhile rival, Hillary Clinton?

Mr Mueller’s investigation charged the former Trump campaign chairman,
Paul Manafort, and his business partner, Rick Gates, with a scheme to
conceal some $20m, much of it earned for lobbying work in Ukraine
undertaken for pro-Russian interests. The indictments—to which both men
plead not guilty—allege Mr Manafort spent millions on Range Rovers and
landscaping at properties in Florida, Manhattan and the Hamptons (he also

dropped $934,000 at an antique rug shop, $849,000 on clothing in New York
and $520,000 at a men’s outfitters in Beverley Hills).

A second set of charges concerns a young campaign operative, George
Papadopoulos, who has pleaded guilty to lying to federal officials. Mr Trump
tweeted that “few people knew the young, low level volunteer named George,
who has already proven to be a liar.” Alas for the Trump campaign, the plea
deal relates that after being flipped and turned into a “proactive co-operator”
by prosecutors, young George disclosed months of contacts with a London-
based academic with Russian ties, “the Professor”, and a mysterious “Female
Russian National” who were keenly interested in his role with Team Trump,
and told him in late April 2016 that the Russian government had “dirt” on
Mrs Clinton in the form of “thousands of e-mails.”

Though the provenance of those e-mails is not clear, the outside world did
not learn until June 2016 that embarrassing e-mails had been stolen from the
Democratic National Committee (DNC), and learned only in October that e-
mails had also been hacked from the account of John Podesta, head of the
Clinton campaign. American intelligence chiefs blamed those hacking attacks
on Russian military intelligence.

The federal filings do record Mr Papadopoulos being rebuffed on occasion by
senior Trump campaign officials as he pushed for a meeting between the
candidate and the Russian government. But they also quote a “Campaign
Supervisor” telling him in August 2016 to meet Russian officials off the
record “if it is feasible”.

Mr Trump observed, accurately, that the money-laundering and tax-fraud
charges laid against his former campaign chairman predate the presidential
campaign. He further noted, in a flurry of intemperate tweets, that the
indictment against Mr Manafort makes no mention of collusion with Russia.
This led him to complain: “But why aren’t Crooked Hillary and the Dems the
focus?????” Drawing on recent reports that the DNC paid for opposition
research about Mr Trump, involving sources in Russia, his White House
press secretary, Sarah Huckabee Sanders, declared: “There is clear evidence
of the Clinton campaign colluding with Russian intelligence to smear the
president,” adding that “it might not be a bad idea” for Congress to
investigate Mrs Clinton. Conservatives were cock-a-hoop when Tony

Podesta, a Democratic super-lobbyist (and brother of John Podesta), stepped
down after his firm was questioned over about late reporting work on
Ukraine, commissioned by Mr Manafort.

A former prosecutor who knows Mr Mueller and his team sees a two-pronged
strategy, involving “pure pressure” on Mr Manafort and Mr Gates to turn and
co-operate, and the plea deal with Mr Papadopoulos to “telegraph that they
are on to the Russia thing” and scare anyone who had dealings with the
campaign aide, some of whom may now be re-interviewed. “Slow and
steady,” says this source.

Samuel Buell, another former federal prosecutor, now at Duke University
School of Law, suggests that too many are treating the Mueller investigation
like a “Mafia family case”, in which prosecutors are trying to pin known
crimes on a known crime boss, by working their way up a pyramid. “This
case doesn’t look like a pyramid to me, it looks like a mosaic with different
pieces.”

The real villain in this puzzle is Russia. If Mr Trump and his supporters are
anxious to talk about Mrs Clinton instead, that may be because Russia’s
meddling was, in the judgment of American intelligence agencies, intended
to help Mr Trump. Moreover, the Trump camp was unusually pro-Russian in
its policies, and careless about contacts with Russian proxies. E-mails already
made public show Donald Trump junior, the president’s son, being told in
June 2016 that the Russian government had scuttlebutt on Mrs Clinton and
wanted to use it to help his father. “I love it,” replied the younger Trump. A
senior adviser to another Republican presidential campaign says that if his
team had been offered dirt on an opponent by someone claiming Russian
government connections, “We’d have gone straight to the FBI.”

This article was downloaded by calibre from https://www.economist.com/news/united-
states/21730921-cue-calls-jail-hillary-clinton-donald-trumps-former-campaign-chief-
indicted/print

| Section menu | Main menu |

| Next | Section menu | Main menu | Previous |

High-stakes health care

Chipped away

Congressional inaction threatens health insurance for poor children

Nov 2nd 2017 | NEW YORK AND WASHINGTON, DC

CONGRESS seldom agrees on health care, as is shown by the Republicans’
fruitless attempts to rip up the Affordable Care Act, or Obamacare. A
longtime exception to partisan feuds was the Children’s Health Insurance
Programme (CHIP), established in 1997. The scheme, which covers some 9m
American children, has been credited, along with Medicaid, health insurance
for the poor, and Obamacare, with reducing the share of children without
health insurance from 14% to a record low of 5% over the past 20 years. But
on September 30th federal funding for CHIP expired. State agencies, which
administer the programme with federal grants, are running short of cash and
are on the cusp of issuing notices cancelling policies.

Lawmakers, who must offer a fix to restore the funds, are dithering while
Republican leaders concentrate on grander legislation. Senators Orrin Hatch
of Utah, a rock-ribbed Republican and a grandfather of CHIP, and Ron

Wyden, a Democrat from Oregon, have offered a bipartisan patch to fund the
programme for the next five years. Over the next ten the proposed fix would
cost $8.2bn, a paltry sum for a Congress also pondering a tax cut of $1.5trn.
But the bill has become stuck in the House, where committee members have
attached contentious offsets tinkering with Medicaid and Medicare—health
insurance for the elderly—which are unlikely to be approved by Democrats.
This brinkmanship “breaks the history of bipartisanship” that CHIP has long
enjoyed, says David Blumenthal, the president of the Commonwealth Fund, a
health-policy think-tank. “We’re setting ourselves up for a game of chicken.” 

As yet, no state has been forced to suspend coverage or issue cancellations.
State CHIP programmes have instead run on fumes, subsisting on unspent
funds and emergency injections of federal funds from the Centres for
Medicare & Medicaid Services. These jerry-rigged funding mechanisms will
not last long. By the end of the year six states, including California and Ohio,
expect to be completely out of cash. Most will have blown through reserves
by the first quarter of 2018. In Utah, where 19,000 children are covered by
CHIP, cancellation notices were supposed to go out this month, though the
health department is trying to delay them as long as possible.

Because CHIP is financed through block grants, large cash transfers with few
restrictions, the scheme is administered differently from state to state. Some
create stand-alone programmes, but almost every state enrolls children in
Medicaid to reduce administrative burdens. Because a provision of
Obamacare requires states to maintain their insurance-eligibility standards
until the end of 2019, states with children in Medicaid may be legally on the
hook for their medical bills. Those with separated programmes may freeze
enrolment, create more stringent eligibility rules or discontinue their
operations altogether. Perhaps because of turmoil at the Department of Health

and Human Services—the secretary has been sacked for using private planes
at the public’s cost—the Trump administration has been quiet on the matter,
not issuing public guidance to the states.

Besides wasting administrative resources, winding down CHIP programmes
might reverse the steady increase in insured children. Without federal funds,
1.2m children would lose their health insurance because alternative coverage
would be too expensive, according to the Urban Institute, a think-tank.

Even if funding is eventually restored, serving cancellation notices to families
is like unfurling an “unwelcome mat” before them, says Joan Alker of
Georgetown University. Arizona temporarily stopped accepting new children
in December 2009. By July 2011, enrolments had dropped 60%. Continued
congressional inaction will have disparate impacts: around 45% of currently
uninsured children are Hispanic. So-called mixed families, with
undocumented parents but children who are American citizens, may be
especially wary of enrolling for fear of alerting the immigration authorities.

This article was downloaded by calibre from https://www.economist.com/news/united-
states/21730912-congressional-inaction-threatens-health-insurance-poor-children-
chipped-away/print

| Section menu | Main menu |

| Next | Section menu | Main menu | Previous |

A Palm Tree in the woods

Hasidic Jews in upstate New York

Monroe’s referendum and a peculiar population boom

Nov 2nd 2017 | KIRYAS JOEL, NEW YORK

KIRYAS JOEL is not like other New York suburbs. Although surrounded by
bucolic winding roads and stunning vistas of the wooded foothills of the
Catskill mountains, there are few stand-alone houses with big back gardens
or picket fences. Almost everyone lives tightly packed in a square-mile
labyrinth of multistorey condominium complexes. The population of the
village, which forms part of the town of Monroe, about 40 miles (65km)
north of New York City, has grown by 5% a year since 2000. For the past
few years, its surging population and the resulting demands for land have put
it at odds with long-time locals. After lawsuits and tense negotiations,
Monroe voters will decide in a referendum on November 7th whether to
separate Kiryas Joel, add some land and create a new town, to be called Palm
Tree.

Kiryas Joel was founded in the 1970s by Joel Teitelbaum, the grand rebbe of

the Satmar Hasidic sect. The community has grown from 500 in 1977 to
more than 22,000 today. Many of the new arrivals were priced out of their
old neighbourhoods in trendy Brooklyn. Part of the growth is driven by
Hasidic custom: women marry young and have big families. But many of the
families are struggling, with more than half below the poverty line.

Like other Brooklyn-ites, Hasids like to live within walking distance of
synagogue and kosher delicatessens and butchers, and close to ritual
bathhouses and yeshivas (schools). The rural footpaths are packed with
women in long skirts, who cover their hair with hats, wigs or scarves, and are
usually pushing a pram while holding a few more children by the hand.
Bearded men, wearing black coats and brimmed hats, walk purposefully.
Street and shop signs are often in Yiddish or Hebrew. The conversations are
conducted in Yiddish. There is little interaction with their non-Hasidic
neighbours.

“The tension [between the two groups] is not coming from a place of anti-
Semitism,”, says Samuel Heilman, an expert on Orthodox Judaism and a
professor at Queens College. But tensions there are. A “Welcome to Kiryas
Joel” sign asks visitors to wear long skirts and sleeves past the elbow and to
“maintain gender separation in all public areas”. It would be illegal to pass a
law to this effect, but such a rule is already enforced by custom. Kiryas Joel
already has its own school district, where boys and girls receive a religious
education in separate classrooms.

The village also has increasing political muscle. Four years ago, Kiryas Joel
showed itself to be a strong voting bloc, when most of its votes went to the
winner in an election to choose Monroe’s town supervisor. More than half of
all voters will be Hasidic by 2021, according to one estimate.

Some of Monroe’s non-Hasids see the split as a way to restore their political
voice, and end years of feuding. Others see the split as just delaying the
inevitable end of Monroe. Although the referendum’s terms dictate that no
further annexation will be permitted for ten years, Kiryas Joel is already
bursting at the seams and residents are spilling into other parts of Monroe and
into neighbouring towns. Monroe will see a drop of 10% in tax revenues if
the referendum passes, requiring either spending cuts or tax increases. If
Monroe votes to split itself next week, the new town of Palm Tree will be

founded in 2020.

This article was downloaded by calibre from https://www.economist.com/news/united-
states/21730922-monroes-referendum-and-peculiar-population-boom-hasidic-jews-upstate-
new-york/print

| Section menu | Main menu |

| Next | Section menu | Main menu | Previous |

Thus spake Joe

Texas politics after Joe Straus

The state’s culture warriors cheer as the long-standing Speaker of the
statehouse steps down

Nov 2nd 2017 | AUSTIN

SIX days after upending Texas politics by suddenly announcing his
retirement, Joe Straus sounds like a man at peace. “I feel confident it was the
right decision,” says Mr Straus, who has served as House Speaker since 2009,
longer than any other Republican. “I didn’t want to be one of those people
who held on to an office just because he could…There are new players and
they deserve to have their voice heard.” Not everyone believes his reasons for
leaving are so high-minded. Mark Jones, a political scientist at Rice
University, believes that Mr Straus “grew weary and tired of saving the
Republican Party from itself, and not only not getting thanked for it, but
getting blasted and attacked for it.”

During Mr Straus’s dozen years in office, Texas Republicans have marched
further right. Mr Straus, by contrast, is a moderate. Though he worked for

Ronald Reagan, Mr Straus drives a hybrid car and his wife served on the
board of Planned Parenthood, which provides birth-control services
(including abortions) in their hometown of San Antonio—both serious
demerits in today’s Republican Party. He won repeated speakership elections
with bipartisan support. As his state’s first Jewish Speaker, he weathered
anti-Semitic attacks: one member of the state’s Republican executive
committee urged members to support “a true, Christian conservative”. His
departure illustrates the waning power of his party’s business wing, and
presages a bruising intra-party fight in Texas—for which much of the South
ought to start preparing.

The party’s right wing is already celebrating. Matt Rinaldi, a member of the
House Freedom Caucus who represents a suburban Dallas district, called Mr
Straus “a terrible Speaker…almost totalitarian. He silenced the voices of the
majority in the House.” Michael Quinn Sullivan, who heads a powerful
conservative advocacy group called Empower Texans, said he was “happy…
maybe now some pro-taxpayer initiatives can finally move forward.”

Straus’s blue period

Conservatives blame Mr Straus for failing to pass a bill that would have made
it easier for citizens to veto a property-tax increase (because Texas has no
income tax, local governments rely on property and sales taxes). In this
year’s legislative sessions, he successfully opposed a school-voucher
programme, measures to limit state- and local-government spending, a bill
telling transgender people where they can pee and a bill that would have
banned organisations that also provide abortions from receiving any tax
money. Greg Abbott and Dan Patrick, the state’s governor and lieutenant-
governor respectively, championed these measures, and fumed at Mr Straus
after the session ended. With Mr Straus gone, these measures may pass in
Texas’s next legislative session in 2019, as could a version of the bathroom
bill.

Yet his retirement may put them in the same awkward position. With Mr
Straus wielding the gavel, they could advocate—or in the case of Mr Patrick,
who heads the Senate, pass—harmful legislation to burnish their social-
conservative credentials, knowing it would never pass the House. Indeed,
rumours in Austin suggest that Mr Abbott offered precisely that assurance to

business leaders on the bathroom bill: Don’t worry, Joe will never let it
through. If a social conservative runs the House, they will no longer be able
to play both sides; they will have to disappoint either Republican activists or
business.

Whoever replaces Mr Straus will probably be more conservative, if only
because the median Republican has moved rightward. But his replacement is
unlikely to be a bomb-thrower. Hard-right candidates may find themselves
challenged early and strongly in next year’s elections. Mr Straus has a $10m
war-chest, and vows to “speak out [and] support responsible Republicans.”
The business lobby looks likely to break with habit, and get involved in
primary campaigns. Chris Wallace, president of the powerful Texas
Association of Business (TAB), complains that this year’s radical agenda
spearheaded by Mr Patrick was “among the most anti-business legislative
sessions we can remember”.

While previously TAB only endorsed candidates, providing no financial
support, it has realised its brand no longer carries the weight it did among
Republicans. The association has revived its political-action committee to
disburse funds to pro-business candidates, even if they challenge Republican
incumbents. It is backing a challenger to a north Texas Republican senator
who believes, among other things, that bike paths are part of a United Nations
plot, that public schools provide “communist indoctrination” and that a
previous opponent was controlled by Satan. Mr Wallace even left open the
possibility of supporting a Democrat in the general election—a rarity for a
business lobby.

Texas is so heavily Republican and redistricted that most races are won in the
primaries. Republicans in Texas, and in much of the South, have become
what Democrats were for most of the 20th century: the only party that
matters. The biggest political fights are within, rather than between, the
parties. Low primary-voter turnout gives outsize power to committed
activists. Mr Straus and other moderate Republicans identify reversing that
trend as their biggest challenge.

Like Bob Corker and Jeff Flake, conservative but non-Trumpist US senators,
Mr Straus had found himself on the edges of a party he once fitted solidly
into. He leaves elected office without regrets. “I spent my time trying to

promote good ideas and reaching across the aisle. I don’t apologise for that.
More people ought to try it.”

This article was downloaded by calibre from https://www.economist.com/news/united-
states/21730889-states-culture-warriors-cheer-long-standing-speaker-statehouse-
steps/print

| Section menu | Main menu |

| Next | Section menu | Main menu | Previous |

Lexington

Democrats will struggle to win back Obama-Trump voters

But giving up on them is not an option

Nov 2nd 2017

IT IS WORTH underlining, in a week dominated by reminders of the
skulduggery that helped send Donald Trump to the White House a year ago,
that the main reason for his victory was democratic. Mr Trump persuaded
about 7m people who voted for Barack Obama in 2012, most of them white,
working-class and malcontent, to vote for him. Many had not voted
Republican before.

In north-eastern Pennsylvania, where Lexington went to talk to some of these
switchers, the rush to Mr Trump was dramatic. A birthplace of trade
unionism, the region’s main towns, Wilkes-Barre and Scranton (which was
also the birthplace of Hillary Clinton’s father), were so Democratic that
Republican gerrymanderers designed the 17th congressional district that
contains them as a Democratic sink. Mr Obama won the district in 2012 by
double digits. So did Mr Trump. “Soon as I went to vote and saw like 50

people queueing up, I knew it was over,” says the barman at the Anthracite
Café, a popular joint in Wilkes-Barre, with mining memorabilia on its walls
and a vast lump of coal out front.

Obama-Trump voters represented only about 4% of the electorate. But
because they were concentrated in the swing states of the industrial north-east
and mid-west, they outweighed Mrs Clinton’s more modest gains with groups
such as the college-educated whites who migrated from the Republicans to
the Democrats. They are the main reason Mr Trump won Michigan,
Pennsylvania and Wisconsin, the states that sealed his victory. Both parties
are now obsessed with them.

Republican strategists say that if they stay with Mr Trump he will be
president until 2025. Considering the electoral advantages incumbents enjoy
(and the improbability that he will be forced from office, no matter what
Robert Mueller finds), they may be right. The Democrats are focused on the
switchers in part for psychological reasons. Like amateur investors, political
parties mourn their losses more than they look forward to future gains. Yet
their concern is justified. In the mid-term elections, the Democrats need to
pick up 24 seats to take the House of Representatives, and many of their
likeliest gains are in places, such as Iowa and Pennsylvania, thick with
Obama-Trump voters.

Democrats are planning a fusillade of messaging on the bread-and-butter
economic issues they believe switchers care about most. A set of moderately
populist economic positions floated by Democratic senators (the party’s
nearest thing to a post-poll reckoning) was an early salvo. “These voters
turned to Trump because they were desperate for economic change,” says
Matt Cartwright, the 17th district’s Democratic representative. “Take away
the economic anxiety and the bigotry and misogyny go away.” Yet polling
data offer little support for that.

Some switchers do seem open to persuasion. Almost 30% voted for a
Democratic House candidate in 2016, which suggests both a residual tie to
the party and how singularly Mrs Clinton was disliked. “She was the status
quo and we wanted change,” says Mark Mackrell, owner of a Scranton
barbershop. The data also suggest Obama-Trump voters are less pessimistic
and more regretful of their choice than the average Trump supporter—but

only a bit. Just 16% lament their vote, compared with 6% of Trump
supporters overall. As this might suggest, Trump fans’ economic and cultural
worries are not as separable as the Democrats hope.

Economic privation does not explain why so many working-class whites
chose Mr Trump. The poorest picked Mrs Clinton. Indeed, analysis by the
bipartisan Voter Studies Group finds no unifying attitude among Trump
voters on any economic issue. Much likelier indicators of support for him
were cultural and not pretty. They included support for his promised Muslim
ban and a belief that white Americans were discriminated against.

As Arlie Russell Hochschild, a sociologist, has written, such biases are
fuelled by anxiety about socioeconomic status in a changing America. Even
as working-class whites find themselves working harder, for less reward, they
look around and see women and non-whites on the rise—presumably at their
expense, some conclude. This helps explain why there has been a steady flow
of working-class whites from the Democrats, the champion of those rising
groups, over the past two decades. Mr Trump’s success was based on
supercharging that pre-existing change, through his attacks on immigrants,
Muslims and the trade deals that working-class Americans also decry.

For love or money

For Democrats to unwind their recent losses they would have to succeed
where they have failed for two decades, against a party that has learned to
press its advantage with crude brilliance. Even in the mid-terms, when Mr
Trump will not be on the ballot, this may be harder than they think, judging
by the campaign Ed Gillespie is running in Virginia’s gubernatorial race.
Formerly known as a pro-business conservative, he is airing ads that accuse
his equally inoffensive Democratic opponent of being an enabler for a
Salvadorean drug gang.

Even without Mrs Clinton weighing on their appeal, the Democrats will need
more than a new economic message to respond to that. They must show they
are sufficiently in touch with their lost voters’ cultural worries to warrant a
fair hearing. In a rematch against Mr Trump, that would be hard; the
Democrats cannot refrain from condemning his bigotry without offending
their other supporters. Yet they can promote more candidates with socially

conservative views. They can try articulating the concerns of their constituent
groups in the broadest terms: equal pay for women matters for economic
competitiveness as well as fairness; criminal-justice reform would be fiscally
responsible as well as just. It is a daunting task. But the alternative is to ask
Obama-Trump voters to choose between cultural and economic anxieties,
because neither party can address both. And, on recent evidence, culture wins
that fight every time.

This article was downloaded by calibre from https://www.economist.com/news/united-
states/21730875-giving-up-them-not-option-democrats-will-struggle-win-back-obama-
trump/print

| Section menu | Main menu |

| Next section | Main menu | Previous section |

The Americas

Venezuela’s debt crisis: Staying afloat, somehow [Thu, 02 Nov 23:23]
Innovation in Canada: The founding of Maple Valley [Thu, 02
Bello: Learning from Lázaro [Thu, 02 Nov 23:23]

Nov 23:23]

| Next section | Main menu | Previous section |

| Next | Section menu | Main menu |

Staying afloat, somehow

How long can Venezuela avoid default?

South America’s insolvent left-wing champion has been the star of
sovereign-bond markets

Nov 2nd 2017 | CARACAS

THE mere mention of Venezuela should make most investors shudder. Its
president, Nicolás Maduro, says that capitalism has “destroyed the planet”
and vows to build a socialist Utopia. The country’s economic output has
shrunk by more than a third since 2014, and it is suffering from dire shortages
of food and medicine.

Nonetheless, one class of Venezuelan assets has delivered returns in recent
years that would leave any investor licking his chops: bonds issued by the
government and by PDVSA, the state oil company. Since January 2015 they
have risen in value by nearly 60%, while every coupon has been paid at sky-
high interest rates. “There has never been a bondholder’s better friend than
Venezuela,” says Ray Zucaro of RVX Asset Management, a Florida-based
investment firm.

The spectacle of foreign creditors growing fat off Venezuelan debt while the
country’s people go hungry—on average, respondents to a recent survey said
their weight had fallen by 9kg (20lbs) during the past year—should
eventually prove both politically untenable and financially unsustainable. Mr
Maduro’s government is indeed teetering ever closer to the brink of default.
On October 27th PDVSA said it had made an $842m principal payment.
However, investors did not start to receive the money until November 1st,
and intermediaries handling the transaction told clients to expect a transfer on
November 2nd—four days after the due date. Nomura, an investment bank,
calls the episode a “near miss”. Another instalment, worth $1.2bn, was also
due on November 2nd. To fulfil these obligations, Venezuela has delayed
more than $700m of other payments, making use of a 30-day grace period.

As the insolvent government shuffles money from one pocket to another to
stave off bankruptcy, investors expect the worst. The pricing of Venezuelan
credit-default swaps corresponds to a 75% likelihood of some form of default
within the next 12 months, and a 99% chance during the next five years.
However, the markets have long underestimated Mr Maduro’s commitment
to paying up: in March 2015 they put the odds of a default in the following
year at 60%. And the same factors that have enabled Venezuela to stay afloat
so far could help it to hang on for far longer than markets think is possible.

It is a testament to the magnitude of mismanagement in Venezuela that a
country with more oil reserves than Saudi Arabia has reached such dire
straits. During the presidency of Hugo Chávez, which began in 1999, the
government systematically dismantled the private sector. He expropriated
thousands of businesses, established byzantine controls on consumer prices
and foreign exchange, let cronies loot the public purse and turned PDVSA,
once a cash cow, into a make-work scheme. When he died in 2013 high
petroleum prices still covered up the economy’s rotting foundations. But the
oil boom ended the following year, leaving Mr Maduro, a former bus driver

whose main qualification for office was his loyalty to Chávez, to run a
country in economic free-fall. Mr Maduro doubled down on Chávez’s
policies, turning a grim situation into a humanitarian crisis.

To finance the government’s domestic bills, Mr Maduro has revved up the
printing presses, setting off a bout of hyperinflation. Venezuela’s foreign
creditors, however, require payment in hard currency. As the country’s export
revenues collapsed from $98bn in 2012 to a mere $29bn this year, the
government has let the brunt of the adjustment fall on imports—even of
necessities such as bread and toilet paper.

Venezuela’s surprising rectitude as a debtor stems from an unlikely
confluence of factors. No democratic government could ever plunge its
people into penury and hope to stay in power. Mr Maduro, however, has
dispensed with any pretence of legitimacy: in August he installed a
“constituent assembly” as a sham parliament to replace the opposition-
controlled national assembly. His security forces have responded harshly to
street protests: according to the UN, they have killed at least 46 people in
2017. In general, cash-strapped countries turn to the International Monetary
Fund for loans during financial crises. However, Chávez withdrew from the
Fund in 2007, and it would presumably require Mr Maduro to institute sane
policies in exchange for its assistance.

Given the president’s leftism, his most ideologically consistent option would
be to stop paying, as Argentina did in 2001. Unlike Argentina, however,
Venezuela is a petro-state, with valuable assets abroad. PDVSA owns Citgo,
an American refiner, as well as tankers that dock at foreign ports. If
Venezuela defaults, international creditors will try to seize those assets. That
in turn could bring PDVSA’s operations—and by extension whatever
remains of the Venezuelan economy—to a halt.

Even though Mr Maduro appears dead-set on avoiding default, he is still
struggling to cobble together enough hard currency. The biggest reason the
government has stayed current so far is largesse from foreign patrons. During
the past decade China has lent Venezuela more than $50bn, and accepts
repayment in oil. Russia has also made a series of emergency loans to
PDVSA, often just before sovereign-bond payments were due. In April
Rosneft, an oil company whose majority owner is the Russian government,
lent PDVSA $1bn. In return, according to an investigation by Reuters, a news
agency, it has been offered partial-ownership of as many as nine Venezuelan
oil projects.

What can’t go on

How long can Venezuela continue to make good on its obligations? On one

hand, the country appears to be running out of financial wriggle room. Its
foreign-currency reserves have dwindled from a high of $43bn in 2008 to just
$10bn now, much of it in the form of solid gold ingots. By next year, they are
expected to fall to just $2.4bn.

Moreover, the logistics of payment are growing increasingly difficult. As Mr
Maduro has pushed the country into overt dictatorship, the United States has
responded with sanctions. American entities are banned from doing business
with dozens of senior government figures, including the president, vice-
president, attorney-general and economy minister. They are also prohibited
from dealing in new bond issues by Venezuela and PDVSA. Both measures
appear to have spooked compliance officers in international banks, the more
cautious of whom are advising against all dealings with Venezuela.

Nonetheless, if Venezuela had to live within its domestic means, it would
have gone bust already. The recent recovery in oil prices, which now exceed
$50 a barrel, could delay the government’s day of reckoning. And if
Venezuela does fall behind on payments, its creditors may prove surprisingly
flexible. Seeking redress from a Venezuelan default would be extraordinarily
complicated. The complex ownership structure of PDVSA, a sprawling
conglomerate, is likely to cause long legal battles over which assets belong to
which entities. And because PDVSA has become indistinguishable from the
Venezuelan state, even small holders of its bonds—which lack “collective-
action clauses” that prevent individual creditors from holding the majority to
ransom—might be able to press cross-claims against the government.

In Argentina’s case, litigious bondholders managed to block Argentina’s
payments on its restructured debt nine years after those bonds were issued.
With that experience fresh in mind, many creditors may prefer to cut
Venezuela some slack and continue to collect what they can.

Even if bondholders do play tough, Venezuela’s allies could come to its
rescue. According to Monica de Bolle of the Peterson Institute, a think-tank
in Washington, both China and Russia “want to string this along”. The cost of
maintaining Venezuela’s debt performance is trivial relative to the size of
those governments’ budgets. In exchange they both gain a lasting foothold in
a country with vast energy reserves, and get to vex Donald Trump by
propping up an anti-American regime just 1,300 miles from the mainland

United States.

That geopolitical equation might change if Mr Maduro were toppled. But bets
on his ousting have so far proven just as fruitless as bets on default. His
constituent assembly may draft a new constitution that will secure him in
power. And the opposition, a fragile coalition of parties united only in their
determination to defeat him, began to fracture visibly last month, following a
rout in elections for state governorships (which appear to have been partly
rigged by the government). Two of its best-known leaders, Henry Ramos
Allup and Henrique Capriles, exchanged insults during consecutive press
conferences.

Mr Zucaro predicts that the opposition’s “cannibalistic” tendency will keep
Mr Maduro in office, and that investments in the black sheep of sovereign-
debt markets will continue to pay off. He declares: “I don’t think the party is
over yet.”

This article was downloaded by calibre from
https://www.economist.com/news/americas/21730895-south-americas-insolvent-left-wing-
champion-has-been-star-sovereign-bond-markets-how-long/print

| Section menu | Main menu |

| Next | Section menu | Main menu | Previous |

The founding of Maple Valley

How Canada’s unique research culture has aided artificial intelligence

The country has made a virtue out of limited resources

Nov 2nd 2017 | TORONTO

ROBOTS controlled by remote supercomputers. Self-driving cars on narrow,
winding streets. Board-game players of unimaginable skill. These successes
of artificial intelligence (AI) rely on neural networks: algorithms that churn
through data using a structure loosely based on the human brain, and
calculate functions too complex for humans to write. The use of such
networks is a signature of firms in Silicon Valley. But they were largely
invented not in California but in Canada.

How did this breakthrough emerge from the land of moose and maple syrup?
Canada cannot compete with America in research funding. Instead, it has
made a virtue of limited resources, developing an alternative model of
innovation based on openness to unorthodox ideas.

The roots of Canada’s contributions to AI reach back decades. In 1982 Fraser

Mustard (pictured, centre), a doctor, founded the Canadian Institute for
Advanced Research (CIFAR). He envisioned it as a “university without
walls”, in which researchers could work across disciplines. Funded by the
Canadian government, CIFAR encouraged its fellows to share their best ideas
rather than guarding them jealously.

Five years later Geoffrey Hinton, an English polymath, joined CIFAR and
began work on the primitive field of neural networks. After a long hiatus, he
returned in 2003 to set up a CIFAR group dedicated to neural networks,
called Neural Computation and Adaptive Perception (NCAP). NCAP
included Sebastian Thrun, who later founded the arm of Google that
researches “moonshot” technologies; Terry Sejnowski, a prominent
neuroscientist; and Jeff Hawkins, who invented the Palm Pilot.

NCAP, now called Learning in Machines and Brains, funds researchers from
all over the world, not just Canada. It does not require them to work in the
same place. But by providing them with modest financing and a framework
for collaboration, it has created a breeding ground for out-of-the-box ideas.
Mel Silverman, who ran NCAP for CIFAR, remembers a young member
scrawling equations on a whiteboard that were intended to be a mathematical
description of consciousness.

Before long, NCAP began to produce a stream of the most cited research in
AI, and its members spread to leading firms. In 2006 Mr Hinton published a
paper with Ruslan Salakhutdinov, who now leads Apple’s AI efforts,
showing that neural networks can simplify complex models down to just a
few variables. Six years later, two of Mr Hinton’s students used neural
networks to win an image-recognition contest with a system twice as accurate
as the runner-up. Google hired both of them.

Canada’s open-information strategy makes it hard for the government to
measure the return on its investment. Nonetheless, the soft benefits are clear.
In June a new research lab called Element AI raised $102m. In recent months
Google has set up an office in Toronto, and Facebook and Samsung have
opened AI labs in Montreal.

CIFAR’s model has worked for topics other than AI, though not to the same
extent. One project is exploring how interactions between genes and the

environment affect human development; another focuses on the network of
bacteria in the human gut, which is important for health. Neither has yet
yielded an industry-changing technology like neural networks, but both have
that potential. The coming years will show whether Canada got lucky with
NCAP, or whether its unique approach to innovation will continue to bear
fruit.

This article was downloaded by calibre from
https://www.economist.com/news/americas/21730905-country-has-made-virtue-out-limited-
resources-how-canadas-unique-research-culture-has/print

| Section menu | Main menu |

| Next | Section menu | Main menu | Previous |

Bello

Mexico’s presidential front-runner misunderstands his role model

Lázaro Cárdenas was a proud institution-builder, not a populist

Nov 4th 2017

WHEN Latin America zigs, Mexico seems to zag. In the mid-2000s a
political “pink tide” swept left-of-centre leaders into power across the region,
while Mexico elected two conservative presidents. Now that tide has ebbed,
as Brazil, Argentina, Peru and others have swung to the right. But Mexico
may again prove an exception. The front-runner in its presidential contest in
2018 is Andrés Manuel López Obrador, a left-wing populist.

He is no policy wonk, and prefers fiery speeches to ten-point plans. As mayor
of Mexico City from 2000 to 2005, he focused on motorways and local
pensions. Even so, it is hard to predict how he might govern as president. He
lists three former presidents—Benito Juárez, Francisco Madero and Lázaro
Cárdenas—as his heroes. Of these, Cárdenas, Mexico’s foremost leftist,
appears uppermost in his mind.

Tata (“Papa”) Lázaro is remembered above all for two achievements. In 1938
he seized British- and American-owned oilfields, and nationalised the
industry. He also enacted large-scale land reform, breaking up big estates into
ejidos, or peasant collectives. These policies have proved durable. The state
still controls almost all of Mexico’s oil, and ejidos remain throughout the
countryside.

Both issues sit near the top of Mr López Obrador’s agenda. He denounces
recent reforms to open the energy industry to private firms as the work of
traitors, and has called for a referendum on fully returning the oil sector to the
state. In his book, “2018: The Way Out”, he lauds the price floors Cárdenas
set for basic crops, which he hopes to reinstate in order to make Mexico self-
sufficient in agriculture.

Yet Mr López Obrador seems to misunderstand how his idol left such a
lasting legacy. Cárdenas had a keen sense of what his son, Cuauhtémoc, has
called “the distinction between the popular and the populist”. Tata Lázaro
sought to reduce social division, not augment it. He seldom incited hatred
against rivals, and pardoned 10,000 people who had risen up against the state.
Mr López Obrador, in contrast, is less fond of unifying gestures. As mayor,
he mocked anti-kidnapping protesters as pirrurris (“rich kids”).

Cárdenas was also a proud institution-builder. When he took office, his party
was little more than a clique of generals from the Mexican Revolution. He
transformed it into a movement with 4.3m members, which would become
the Institutional Revolutionary Party (PRI) and hold power until 2000. In
1940, rather than cling to power or appoint a radical ally, the Marx-reading
president picked a moderate successor. That set the stage for decades of
political stability and economic growth, and entrenched the principle of a
single presidential term with no re-election that Mexico still abides by. The
PRI was certainly corporatist and undemocratic. But as a system stronger
than the people who ran it, it was unique in Latin America—at least until it
unravelled into corrupt incompetence.

Mr López Obrador could not be more different. He has undermined Mexico’s
democratic institutions. After a narrow defeat in the presidential election of
2006, he refused to concede, claiming without evidence that the result was
fraudulent. He declared himself the “legitimate president” and led protests for

weeks.

He also has little use for political parties. After twice running as the
presidential candidate of the Party of the Democratic Revolution, which was
founded by Cuauhtémoc Cárdenas, he ditched it in 2012 to form Morena, a
new left-wing party, purely as a vehicle for his candidacy. He is unlikely to
enjoy a legislative majority if elected, and his confrontational manner will
make it difficult for him to find allies for his policies.

Abroad, Mr López Obrador pledges to act “like the older brother in Latin
America”, not the obedient younger brother of the United States. However,
Cárdenas based his oil expropriation on cool calculation as well as nationalist
zeal. He correctly anticipated that Franklin Roosevelt would be wary of
driving Mexico towards Germany, ensuring that any retaliation would be
limited. If elected, Mr López Obrador will face a much tetchier antagonist. In
February he described Donald Trump as an “irresponsible neo-fascist”, a
slight the thin-skinned American president is unlikely to forget.

If efforts to revise the North American Free-Trade Agreement somehow
satisfy Mr Trump, Mr López Obrador still vows to revisit any deal he finds
“unfair”. And not all Mexican presidents have enjoyed Cárdenas’s good luck
in tussles with Uncle Sam. A border dispute manufactured by the Americans
in 1846 ended with Mexico losing half of its territory. The longer view shows
that picking fights with the United States carries risks as well as rewards.

This article was downloaded by calibre from
https://www.economist.com/news/americas/21730903-l-zaro-c-rdenas-was-proud-
institution-builder-not-populist-mexicos-presidential/print

| Section menu | Main menu |

| Next section | Main menu | Previous section |

Essay

Luther’s reformation: The stand [Thu, 02 Nov 23:23]

| Next section | Main menu | Previous section |

| Next | Section menu | Main menu |

Luther’s reformation

The stand

Nov 4th 2017 | ALMOLONGA, GUATEMALA

IN THE summer of 1974, a 26-year-old Mayan villager lay drunk in a town
square in the Guatemalan highlands. Suddenly he heard a voice that was to
change the course of his life and that of his home town, Almolonga. “I was
lying there and I saw Jesus saying, ‘I love you and I want you to serve me’,”
says the man, Mariano Riscajche. He dusted himself down, sobered up and
soon started preaching, establishing a small Protestant congregation in a room
not far from the town’s ancient Catholic church.

Half a millennium earlier, a 33-year-old German monk experienced
something similar. At some point between 1513 and 1517, Martin Luther had
a direct encounter with God and felt himself “to be reborn and to have gone
through open doors into paradise”. His moment of being born again was
private. The day on which he is said to have nailed a list of 95 complaints
about ecclesiastical corruption to the church door in Wittenberg, Saxony—
widely thought to have been October 31st 1517—made the private public
and, soon, political. A mixture of princely patronage, personal stubbornness

and chance led what could have ended up as just another minor protest in a
remote corner of Europe to become a global movement.

At the heart of this Protestant faith were, and are, three beliefs resting on the
Latin word for “alone”: sola fide (that people are saved by faith in Jesus
alone, not by anything they do); sola gratia (that this faith is given by grace
alone, and cannot be earned); and sola scriptura (that it is based on the
authority of the Bible alone, and not on tradition or the church). In a way that
complemented the broader themes of the Renaissance, Luther wanted
Christianity to go back to the “pristine Gospel”: the teachings of Jesus and
the apostles. This return offered a new sort of freedom, one centred on the
individual, which helped pave the way for modernity. “The separation of
powers, toleration, freedom of conscience, they are all Protestant ideas,” says
Jacques Berlinerblau, a sociologist at Georgetown University.

A safe stronghold

Protestantism continues to change lives today; indeed, over the recent
decades the number of its adherents has grown substantially. Since the 1970s,
about three-quarters of Almolonga’s 14,000 residents have converted; more
than 40% of Guatemala’s population is now Protestant. Its story is a
microcosm of a broader “Protestant awakening” across Latin America and the
developing world. According to the Pew Research Centre Protestants
currently make up slightly less than 40% of the world’s 2.3bn Christians;
almost all the rest are Roman Catholics. The United States is home to some
150m Protestants, the largest number in any country.

In Luther’s native Germany roughly half the Christians follow his
denomination. But today Europe accounts for only 13% of the world’s
Protestants. The faith’s home is the developing world. Nigeria has more than
twice as many Protestants as Germany. More than 80m Chinese have
embraced the faith in the past 40 years.

There are many ways to be a Protestant, from the quietist to the ecstatic. The
fastest-growing varieties tend to be the evangelical ones, which emphasise
the need for spiritual rebirth and Biblical authority. Among developing-world
evangelicals, Pentecostals are dominant; their version of the faith is
charismatic, in that it emphasises the “gifts” of the Holy Spirit, held to be a

universally accessible and sustaining aspect of God. These gifts include
healing, prophecy and glossolalia. According to the World Christian
Database at Gordon-Conwell Theological Seminary in Massachusetts,
Pentecostals and other evangelicals and charismatics account for 35% of
Europe’s Protestants, 74% of America’s and 88% of those in developing
countries. They make up more than half of the developing world’s Christians,
and 10% of all people on Earth.

Changed lives change places. Almolonga’s Pentecostal believers have
brought new energy to their town. Where once the prison was full and drunks
slumped in the streets, there is now a buzz of activity. A secondary school
opened in 2003; it sends some of its graduates, all members of the indigenous
K’iché people, to national universities. “We want one of our students to work
at NASA,” says Mr Riscajche’s son, Oscar, who chairs the school board.

Scholars have been surprised by the developing world’s Protestant boom.
K.M. Panikkar, an Indian journalist, spoke for many when he predicted in the
1950s that Christianity would struggle in a post-colonial world. What might
survive, he suggested, in both Protestant and Catholic forms, would be a
more modern, liberal form of the faith. The Pentecostal expansion proved
him quite wrong. Peter Berger of Boston University, a leading sociologist of
religion (who died this summer), saw it as a key part of a wider
“desecularisation” of the world.

To some extent, this growth of Pentecostalism among the global poor marks a
loss of faith in political and secular creeds. As Mike Davies, an American
writer and activist, put it in 2004, “Marx has yielded the historical stage to
Mohammed and the Holy Ghost.” But it is worth noting that between 2000
and 2017 the 1.9% annual growth in the number of Muslims was mostly due
to an expanding population, whereas a significant part of Pentecostalism’s
expansion of 2.2% a year was due to conversion. Half of Latin America’s
Protestants did not grow up in the faith.

Their emphasis on personal experience makes Pentecostalism and similar
beliefs culturally malleable; their simplicity and ability to dispense with
clergy gives them a nimbleness that suits people on the move. They tend to
erode distinctions of faith based on ethnicity or birthplace. To Berger, that
made this sort of Protestantism a modernising force. It is, he argued, “the

only major religion which, at the core of its piety, insists on an act of personal
decision.” Its mixture of distinctive individualism and strong, supportive
communities, he wrote, makes it “a very powerful package indeed”.

It is a bootstrapping faith. Anyone pulling himself up in the world can join.
Many of those who do are from the margins of society. Churches provide
migrants in their congregations with employment, support and the possibility
of advancement. Where the faith is not part of the establishment, as in Latin
America or China, it carries the potential for disruption.

For some sociologists, such ideas evoke the ghost of Max Weber, whose
book, “The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism”, published in 1905,
posited that modern capitalism was the unintended consequence of an “inner-
worldly asceticism” in early modern Protestantism. Such people made money
but did not spend it, creating a thrifty, hard-working, literate, self-denying
citizenry who drove forward the economies of their countries.

Few economists these days put much stock in Weber’s views. They point out
that there was plenty of proto-capitalism—in 13th-century Italian city-states,
for instance—before the Reformation, and the development of its modern
form was influenced by many other factors. Today the idea seems out of date:
the borders that once ensured an overlap between national markets and
economic moralities have given way to capital flows and a consumer culture
in which unrestricted gratification seems to be the norm.

Yet some hear echoes of Weber’s ideas in Pentecostalism’s growing social
influence. “In Guatemala the Pentecostal church is just about the only
functioning organisation of civil society,” says Kevin O’Neill of the
University of Toronto. Almost all the drug-rehabilitation centres in
Guatemala City, of which there are more than 200, are run by Pentecostal
volunteers. Throughout Latin America, there are hints of the faith’s
socioeconomic impact. A recent study of Brazilian men by Joseph Potter of
the University of Texas and others found that Protestant faith was associated
with an increase in the earnings of male workers over a 30-year period,
especially among less educated people of colour.

In Almolonga itself, in the first decade of this century, farmers on average
earned twice as much as those in the next village, where Protestantism had
not taken off. Sceptics attribute this to the more fertile soil or new methods of
farming. But according to Berger, “Max Weber is alive and well and living in
Guatemala.”

How a turbulent monk turned the world upside down

LUTHER was an accidental revolutionary. He was not trying to modernise
his world but to save it. Had he become a lawyer, as his father wanted,
Christendom—the European order organised by its rulers along lines largely
set by the church—might have evolved very differently. The church might
have reformed more from within; it might have fractured even more deeply
than it did.

 
It was change from within that Luther wanted. Having entered an
Augustinian monastery, he went on to teach at the University of Wittenberg.
He still believed in Christendom, but his experience of God persuaded him
that the church was getting it wrong.

In 1521, at the Diet of Worms—an assembly called to discuss Luther’s
teachings presided over by the Holy Roman Emperor, Charles V—Luther
was asked to recant his heretical view that men and women are saved by the
grace of God alone. He replied that he could do so only if the Bible could be
shown to prove him wrong. “My conscience is captive to the word of God. I

cannot and I will not recant anything, for to go against conscience is neither
right nor safe.” He may or may not have then said the words “Here I stand. I
can do no other.” But that is the phrase that went on to define him and his
faith.

Some who of those who took Luther’s Reformation further were better at
systematising the faith. By the 1550s John Calvin had turned Geneva into a
model Protestant city. Others were holier and shrewder. But few were such
prolific agitators. Luther was responsible for more than a fifth of the entire
output of pamphlets from the empire’s newfangled printing presses during
the 1520s. “Every day it rains Luther books,” sighed one churchman.
“Nothing else sells.”

Cantankerous and fiercely anti-Semitic, Luther was far from otherworldly.
He abandoned his vows of chastity and entered an affectionate marriage,
swore freely, drank eagerly and referred frequently to the state of his bowels.
He was by no means a democrat, but his ideas had a huge political impact. In
1596 Andrew Melville, a Scottish Presbyterian, explained Luther’s doctrine
of the “two kingdoms” to his king, James VI. In one kingdom James was a
king, ruling in earthly pomp. But in the other, the kingdom of Christ, James
was “not a king, nor a lord, nor a head, but a member”—the same as anyone
else.

To begin with, Luther and other Protestants were keen that church and state
should continue to be bound together—just with much clearer lines between
their realms of authority. Keeping the state out of the church’s business
meant clerics lost the power to suppress heretics by force. But Luther was
content with that. He insisted that heresy should be fought from pulpits and in
pamphlets, not by coercion. “Let the spirits collide,” he wrote. “If meanwhile
some are led astray, all right, such is war.”

The result was a fissile movement. Protestantism’s first split was between the
“magisterial” reformers, such as Luther and Calvin, who believed in national
churches backed by state power, and the “radical” reformers, such as
Anabaptists—men and women who wanted to form their own separate,
perfect communities without waiting for the world to catch up with them.
Those in the second group were often millenarians who believed in the
imminent return of Jesus, John Milton’s “shortly expected King”. It is partly

from this wing of the faith that the Pentecostal, evangelical and charismatic
strands of modern Protestantism have grown.

The division in Protestantism had political repercussions. The German
Peasants’ Revolt in 1524-25 was led by men who denounced serfdom as
incompatible with Christian liberty and said they would desist only if they
could be proved wrong on Biblical grounds. Luther was shocked at what he
had unleashed, penning a pamphlet entitled “Against the Robbing and
Murdering Hordes of Peasants”. But it was too late. The sects would not do
as they were told. If God had spoken to them directly through his word, what
was there to fear from kings and bishops?

Though the magisterial reformation triumphed in the transformation of
northern European establishments from Catholic to Protestant, it was the
longer-term triumph of the radical reformation that arguably had the deepest
effects, in northern Europe and elsewhere. The new Protestant sects’
insistence that they be free to practise their faith did not extend to others—
notably Catholics—seeking to practise theirs. But it did open up some space
for the toleration and freedom of conscience that eventually helped create the
principle of limited government. Milton’s “Areopagitica” of 1644 urged
freedom of thought and freedom to publish. Uncensored printing offered the
possibility of choice, ending the state church’s monopoly on opinion-
forming.

Protestant toleration was good for business, too. The Calvinist Netherlands of
the late 16th century became the world’s richest society as Huguenots, Jews
and other hard-working refugees from Catholic lands flooded in. “The really
radical twist that Protestantism added was the idea of human spiritual
equality having a political consequence,” says Alec Ryrie of Durham
University, author of “Protestants”, the best recent history of the faith.

This played out in the aftermath of the English civil war when religious
groups such as the Diggers and the Levellers demanded universal male
suffrage and common ownership of the land. In 1647 one of them, Thomas
Rainsborough, said in the Putney debates with Oliver Cromwell, the Puritan
who had led parliament, that “The poorest man in England is not at all bound
in a strict sense to that government that he hath not had a voice to put himself
under.” The Diggers were dispersed, but the idea that equality before God

implied full democracy took root.

The dispossessed, reclaiming what was theirs

The resistance of dissenters impressed John Locke, an English philosopher
with strong Protestant roots. Their stand influenced his writings on freedom
of conscience, which were to form the foundation for English liberalism, and
the Toleration Act of 1689, which formalised the legal acceptance of
nonconformist sects. The participatory ways in which nonconformist
churches often chose their leaders eventually filtered through to society in
general. “Churches were schools of democracy,” says David Martin, a British
sociologist of religion.

If people were to find Bible-based salvation independent of the clergy,
literacy was indispensable. By 1760 about 60% of England’s men, and 40%
of its women, were able to read. Protestant education provided opportunities
for social mobility, improved the status of women and fostered economic
growth. Elie Halévy, an influential early 20th-century French historian,
believed that Methodism helped 18th-century England avoid a revolution of
the sort that later befell France by educating the lower classes and bringing
about social reform. This admiration was not universal: Britain’s pioneering
Marxist historian of the working class, E.P. Thompson, considered
Methodism to be a “ritual form of psychic masturbation”.

Before the Toleration Act and other developments made Britain and northern
Europe more amenable to radical Protestantism, many seeking religious
freedom had crossed the Atlantic to secure it. A strong tradition of radical
Protestantism became a feature of the American colonies and the subsequent
history of the United States, refreshed from time to time by revivalist “great
awakenings”. That America became the fullest example of limited
government enshrined in law is in large part a consequence of its Protestant
settlement. The truths the Founding Fathers held to be self-evident had not
seemed so to anyone before the Reformation.

Like Roman Catholics, Protestants sought to bring their faith to other
peoples, too. The motives for this were mixed, the respect for indigenous
cultures often scant and frequently nonexistent and some of the results
disastrous. That said, Robert Woodberry of Baylor University in Texas has
mounted statistical arguments that former colonies where evangelical (what
he calls “conversionary”) Protestant missionaries were active have become
more democratic. He attributes this to mass education, religious liberty and a
legacy of voluntarism.

In the colonies and Europe alike, Protestant Christianity brought bloodshed
and persecution aplenty. Protestants and Catholics burned each other at the
stake. During the Thirty Years War, fought mainly between Protestant and
Catholic states, 8m people died. Britain, with its established Protestant
church, did more than any other country to build up the trade that shipped
some 12m people across the Atlantic in chains; Protestant America whipped
the slaves thus delivered to work. In the 20th century the apolitical attitude
inherent in Luther’s “two kingdoms” approach led German Protestants to
believe they should not interfere with the state even when power fell into
Nazi hands. Many were “either complicit or indifferent as unimaginable
crimes were committed around them”, says Mr Ryrie.

Throughout, Protestants had an almost comical capacity for hypocrisy of all
kinds. It could be seen not just in their vices, but also their virtues—
particularly a rather selective toleration. The respect for their religious rights
that 16th-century Mennonites demanded from the Dutch Republic was not
extended to dissenters within their own ranks. By 1600 there were at least six
Mennonite groups in the country. They hated each other with a passion.

How far from the tree can the fruits of the spirit fall?

PROTESTANTISM’S fissiparous tendencies persist. When searching for Mr
Riscajche’s church in Almolonga, the Evangelical Church of Calvary, your
confused correspondent thought he had arrived when he discovered the
Mount Calvary Church. Not at all the same thing, it turned out. Almolonga,
small though it is, has at least a dozen Pentecostal churches. But if the
individual congregations for each are small, their cumulative effect is not.

 
Until the 1970s Guatemala was a staunchly Catholic country. When
Protestant aid agencies rushed in after a massive earthquake in 1976, the faith
gained a substantial foothold. After the country’s bloody civil war ended in
1996 it spread as if unshackled. Guatemalans took to the faith for many
reasons, says Virginia Garrard of the University of Texas, but upheaval had a
lot to do with it. The civil war represented a definitive break with the past:
when so much had been destroyed anyway, losing your Catholic heritage
meant less. At a time of painful economic dislocation, people who felt that
Catholicism and liberation theology had failed them turned to an aspirational
faith that promised a new upward mobility. With a low bar to entry and
almost no hierarchy, new Pentecostal churches matched the entrepreneurial
spirit of the times.

The message has resonated elsewhere. In South Korea, the Protestantism that
accompanied the country’s dizzying economic rise was an expression of
Korean nationalism. In China, a modernising population is looking for a
moral framework to go with its new mobility. Yang Fenggang of Purdue
University predicts that there could be at least 160m Protestants in China by
2025. He expects the country will soon be home to more Protestants than
America.

As in early modern Europe, women in developing countries have often been
especially affected by Protestantism. Having studied churches in Colombia,
Elizabeth Brusco, author of “The Reformation of Machismo”, was surprised
to find that evangelicalism was a women’s movement “like Western
feminism”, explaining that “it serves to reform gender roles in a way that
enhances female status.” Male Colombian converts had previously spent up
to 40% of their pay in bars and brothels; that money was redirected to the
family, raising the living standards of women and children. Temperance
helped employment, too. Scholars also argue that the voice this has given
women helps consolidate democracy; Mr Martin sees parallels with
England’s 19th-century Methodists.

That does not mean the faith is egalitarian. Pentecostalism reforms traditional
gender roles rather than abolishing them; it tends to be robustly patriarchal,
and profoundly intolerant of homosexuality. But a sober patriarch committed
to a moral code that, crucially, treats domestic violence as sinful can provide
stability. An acceptance of birth control also eases women’s lot.

More stable, economically active households and well-knit communities have
undoubtedly made places like Almolonga more agreeable for most who live
there. But what effect do they have on a grander scale? Can they remake not
just villages but whole countries and their economies?

Pentecostals have traditionally been suspicious of politics as too “worldly”
and of development work as too long-term. But in Guatemala and elsewhere
some are now mobilising for social change. Witness a rap battle in a
community hall in one of the areas of Guatemala City known as “red zones”.
Teenagers take it in turns to get up on stage and rap against each other, with
judges deciding who goes through to the next round. The event has been
organised by Angel, a local man who joined one of the city’s notorious gangs
when he was 14. By the age of 22, he had shot “a lot of people”, he says.
When he found himself about to be executed by a rival gang, he called out to
God for help; he escaped death and was born again. For the past ten years, in
a typically Pentecostal bottom-up initiative, he has been saving kids from

gangs.

As yet, it is hard to see a broader impact from these individual
transformations. Guatemala remains poor and desperate. Many people do not
vote or pay tax; only a tiny fraction of murder investigations lead to
convictions. The country lags behind the rest of Latin America on many
development indicators. “Guatemala tests the limits of religion as an agent of
change,” says Kevin O’Neill of Toronto University. “It’s not that the religion
is ineffectual. It has changed a lot in society. It’s just that it has not changed
things measurable by the metrics we use, such as security, democracy and
economy.”

Perhaps the sort of change that can be measured will arrive in due course.
Guatemala’s history has left it poor and oligarchic. “Five percent of the
population controls 85% of the wealth,” says Mr O’Neill. More than three-
quarters of the cocaine from South America heading for the United States
now passes through it; many gang members have been deported from Los
Angeles. Any society, never mind one recovering from a 36-year civil war,
would struggle. “Guatemala is like a 400lb man who has lost 100lb in weight.
He is getting better, but he is still in a bad state,” says Ms Garrard, who first
visited in 1979. She ascribes much of the progress to the churches.

But it may also be that there are limits to 21st-century Protestantism’s
capacity for large-scale reform. For one thing, it is largely a faith at the
margins of society. In the places where Protestantism made its clearest mark
in early modern Europe it took root in the bourgeoisie, among people of
influence. A classic example is William Wilberforce, a British politician
whose legislation banning the slave trade stemmed from his evangelical
beliefs. Moreover, northern Europe’s Protestants lived in countries that
already had clear property rights and the rule of law. By contrast, Protestants
in the developing world are often among the poorest members of society,
living in places with endemic corruption.

The otherworldly nature of Pentecostalism does not help. Believing in
imminent apocalypse militates against strong social engagement. The ship is
sinking; rather than try to fix it, Pentecostals want to get as many people as
possible into the lifeboats. “What Guatemala needs is tax reform, voter
registration, microloans, community organising,” says Mr O’Neill. But

“people are just sitting there praying.”

That is not entirely true. “We know we need to change the system,” says
Cash Luna, pastor of Casa de Dios, one of Guatemala’s half-dozen
megachurches. “We pay our taxes and we encourage our congregation to do
the right thing,” he says. The church also tries to mediate in the city’s gang
warfare (Angel is a member) and holds classes for policemen on how to
engage better with the public. Pentecostals took part in the anti-corruption
movement that brought down the country’s president in 2015. But Protestant
involvement in Guatemalan politics has been messy, and plentiful
compromises have dragged the faith into disrepute.

Protean politics

Unlike Catholics, Pentecostals have no unified theology of the state, nor any
well-formulated programme for sociopolitical reform. To the extent that they
are political at all, they merely think that their co-religionists should be
elected and that their countries should be Christian.

In many places they lean to the right. Efraín Ríos Montt, who took control of
Guatemala in a coup in 1982—and thus became the country’s first Protestant
leader—waged the civil war as a fierce anti-Communist. He was responsible
for the deaths of tens of thousands of people, 80% of them indigenous
Mayans; for some, Protestantism became a survival strategy. At the same
time many Nicaraguan evangelicals supported the left-wing Sandinista
government. In Brazil many of the country’s new evangelicals supported
Lula, a left-wing president, in the 2000s. The movement’s political
engagement there has not gone well. One pastor talks of the problem being “a
church without a tradition…and an incapacity to think Christianly about
society.”

It might be argued that the faith has been politically more successful in
opposition than in power. Protestant churches, in particular the historic
denominations established by missionaries, were instrumental in apartheid’s
downfall in South Africa. Similar stories abound. “In Kenya during the
1980s, when all opposition activity was banned, the leaders of the opposition
were, in effect, churchmen,” says Paul Gifford, emeritus professor of religion
at the School of Oriental and African Studies in London.

But there were Protestants on the other side, too: apartheid was underpinned
by the Dutch Reformed Church. Besides, the time for such opposition has
largely passed, and the churches that offered it have not themselves become
more democratic. Their leaders, including Desmond Tutu, a South African
clergyman and theologian, have admitted that they have not adapted as well
as the less hierarchical Pentecostal churches to the post-apartheid order. “We
knew what we were against,” says Mr Tutu. “It is not nearly so easy to say
what we are for.”

Early Protestantism tended to play down possessions. Luther himself called
worldly success a sign of God’s displeasure. The wealth observed by Weber
was treated to some extent as an unintended consequence of its possessors’
Calvinist faith. But in the “prosperity Gospel”, a recent export from the
United States, wealth is very much the intention. Many of the new generation
of pastors tell their flocks that God does not want them to be poor.

In Africa, many Pentecostal churches are concerned with “this-worldly”
victory, says Mr Gifford. In Nigeria congregations with names like the
“Victory Bible Church” hang banners saying things like “Success is my
Birthright”. One of Nigeria’s best known pastors, David Oyedepo, whose
church has been attended by the country’s presidents, says that Christians
must be rich. Such preachers suggest that “planting seeds” (giving money to
the church) will bring a harvest of its own, and that wealth is proof of God’s
love. God must love Mr Oyedepo a lot; the Nigerian press reports that he is
worth more than $150m and owns four private jets.

What Protestants do best is protest

IN 1882 Friedrich Nietzsche, a philosopher raised in Saxony as the son of a
Lutheran minister, declared that God was dead. The vibrant spiritual lives of
billions would seem to give this the lie. But in 20th-century Europe, at least,
there seemed to be some truth to it; and a fair bit of the blame, or credit, fell
to the Reformation. In helping to shape the West, Protestantism sowed the
seeds of its own destruction. In giving people space to believe what they
wanted and choose what sort of life to lead, it allowed them to stop believing
at all and choose something else. And it has not fought as hard to resist this

 
trend as some faiths might. After all, the whole point of Protestantism is that,
in Mr Ryrie’s words, “it values the personal and the private over the political
and the public.”

One effect of European (and, to some extent, American) secularisation is that
old religious divisions are healing. There is still sectarian prejudice in parts of
Europe, but much less than there was. And Protestantism is also less distinct
than it was. According to the Pew Research Centre, 46% of American
Protestants say faith alone is needed to attain salvation—the basis of Luther’s
stand—but more than half now believe that good deeds are needed, too.

As interdenominational divisions have healed, some individual churches have
started to fall apart. In the Anglican communion, which contains the Church
of England and many of its offshoots, homosexuality is driving a wedge
between believers in the northern hemisphere, many of whom increasingly
support gay rights, and those in developing countries, who mostly do not.

Even in America, the proportion of Protestants is declining. Mainline, often
more liberal, denominations fell from 18.1% to 14.7% between 2007 and
2014, according to the Pew Research Centre. The proportion of evangelicals
dropped less drastically, from 26.3% to 25.4%. Meanwhile, the religiously
unaffiliated rose from 16.1% to 22.8%. In future, churches “that disdain the
corruption of public life and offer spiritual rather than political power may
find that their message resonates most,” predicts Mr Ryrie. But the faith will
no doubt continue to be used as a weapon in the culture wars.

As for the developing world, the growth of Protestantism in Africa and Latin
America does not seem to be just a way-station on the road to secularisation.
But nor does it yet look like something that will transform the economy or
politics on a large scale. Its effects may be strong, but they may also be
largely indirect.

In some places Protestantism may settle down, with Pentecostals perhaps
shifting to more staid denominations—or, indeed, fading into secularism.
Some Protestants have understood that when they become the dominant
religion, their faith’s power—its here-I-stand refusal to accept orders from
any source but God or conscience—tends to seep away.

The places where Protestantism is most alive and seems politically most
salient—where its churches continue to argue about who is right and what the
Bible means, issuing statements and counterstatements just as Luther did—
are often those where it has retained its outsider status. The growth of
evangelical faith in China, for example, is taking place in a context of
disapproval from which it seems to draw strength. In 2015 Wang Yi, a
leading pastor, issued his own 95 theses on “Reaffirming our Stance on the
House Churches”—the congregations outside the control of the government.
It reiterated the need for freedom of conscience and for house churches to be
allowed their independence, while protesting against the distortion of
scripture and attacking state-approved churches for collusion with the
Communist Party authorities. Wherever overweening rulers clash with people
demanding their right to religious freedom, Luther’s divisive, dynamic spirit
will remain an inspiration for a long time to come.

This article was downloaded by calibre from
https://www.economist.com/news/essay/21730868-stand/print

| Section menu | Main menu |

| Next section | Main menu | Previous section |

Asia

Donald Trump’s Asian tour: Fore! [Thu, 02 Nov 23:23]
America and South-East Asia: Meet and retreat [Thu, 02 Nov 23:23]
Dual citizenship in Australia: Ignorance is no excuse [Thu, 02 Nov
Indian politics: Tax brake [Thu, 02 Nov 23:23]
The Kazakh language: Apostrophes on the march [Thu, 02 Nov 23:23]

23:23]

| Next section | Main menu | Previous section |

| Next | Section menu | Main menu |

Fore!

Donald Trump’s agenda in Asia is a mystery

But he gets a little credit for showing up

Nov 2nd 2017 | BEIJING, TOKYO AND WASHINGTON, DC

FOR those concerned about American neglect of Asia, it is an
accomplishment of sorts that Donald Trump is coming to the region at all. A
creature of habit, America’s president is uncomfortable spending nights away
from his own bed. And now, with the first indictments in Robert Mueller’s
investigation into Russian interference in the election that put Mr Trump in
office, foreign policy is likely to have fallen even lower down his list of
priorities. Yet on November 3rd Mr Trump begins a 12-day trip, his longest
foreign excursion as president and his first to Asia. He will take in (via
Hawaii) Japan, South Korea, China, Vietnam and the Philippines.

The first rule in Asian politics, where form trumps content, is just showing
up. So far, so promising. What is more, although one of Mr Trump’s first
moves as president was to pull out of the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP), a
12-country free-trade deal—“the greatest self-inflicted wound on American

regional influence since the Vietnam war,” as Michael Green of the Centre
for Strategic and International Studies in Washington puts it—little has yet
come of Mr Trump’s threats to erect barriers to imports from Asian countries
running surpluses with America (ie, nearly all of them). Nor has Mr Trump
followed through on his vow to stop Japan and South Korea free-riding, as he
saw it, on America’s defence guarantees.

America’s relationships in Asia remain vulnerable to Mr Trump’s Twitter
feed. But as Aaron Connelly of the Lowy Institute in Sydney points out, Mr
Trump and the bomb-throwers who promised a radical shift to an “America
First” approach to foreign policy have made little headway. He puts that
down to inexperience, the president’s feeble grasp of foreign affairs, the ease
with which he is distracted and his failure to fill important foreign-policy
positions with fellow travellers (or, often, with anyone at all). As a result,
policy on Asia remains largely in the hands of centrists steeped in America’s
long-standing alliances. Most notably, they believe in more or less the same
approach—deterrence—as the previous administrations towards an
increasingly troubling North Korea. American policy in Asia is on autopilot.

Golf and gas

Some Asian leaders think they have the measure of Mr Trump. In Japan the
prime minister, Shinzo Abe, intends everything to be sweetness and light.
That starts with flattery, something Mr Abe understood from the start of his
personal relationship with the American president. Mr Trump will learn that
Tokyo’s department stores have stocked (exorbitantly marked-up) bottles
from his Virginia winery to honour the visit. There will, of course, be golf.
And Mr Abe will give Mr Trump trade goodies to take home, promising not
only to buy liquefied natural gas from America but also to promote a network
of terminals for its distribution across Asia.

Mr Abe’s aims are twofold. One is to prevent Mr Trump’s hostility to
multilateral trade deals from poisoning the region’s trading relationships. Mr
Abe is pushing hard to preserve TPP as a regional free-trade grouping
without America. Its 11 surviving members gathered outside Tokyo shortly
before Mr Trump was due there.

North Korea is the other pressing issue. As Japanese strategists see it, the

North’s rapid development of an intercontinental ballistic missile capable of
striking American cities has made America as worried about an attack as
Japan and South Korea, which have long been vulnerable to one. Mr Abe has
just fought and won a general election partly on a platform of standing up to
the rogue state. He is likely to push for changes to Japan’s pacifist
constitution that legitimise Japan’s armed forces. To Mr Trump, he will
present this as evidence that Japan is doing its bit, and as an inducement for
America to continue to provide security and to pursue unflinching deterrence
against the North.

Mr Trump’s Japan visit will probably go well. But his unpredictability still
worries Japanese strategists. At least rhetorically, he has lurched between
wildly different approaches to North Korea, at times suggesting that he could
resolve all his differences with Kim Jong Un over a hamburger and at others
implying he was ready to launch a pre-emptive attack. For now, Mr Abe’s
mantra is, hold Mr Trump close.

Moon Jae-in, South Korea’s new president, intends to pursue the same
approach, offering Mr Trump a state visit with all the trimmings. Yet, in
contrast to Mr Abe, his personal relationship with Mr Trump is not easy-
going. That is a concern to Mr Moon’s advisers. Though no sandal-wearing
leftie—Mr Moon served in the special forces, and calls for stronger defences
against the North—his progressive cast does not endear him to Mr Trump.
Many of his countrymen are alarmed at the American president’s loose talk
of pre-emptive war against the North, and think diplomacy should be given
much more of a chance. Mr Moon’s people are nervous about what Mr
Trump might say or tweet while in the country. Meanwhile, Mr Trump’s
threats to tear up the five-year-old United States-Korea Free Trade
Agreement undermine the assurances of solidarity made by his national-
security team.

This equivocation is all the more striking because China seems to be trying to
repair relations with South Korea. For months it has bullied the South for
installing American anti-missile defences known as THAAD. Rather than
accepting that they were needed to counter North Korea, China argued,
solipsistically, that they were aimed at it. China punished South Korea with
boycotts of its products and a ban on Chinese tour groups visiting South

Korea.

But China’s president, Xi Jinping, has emerged from the five-yearly
Communist Party congress with his authority cemented. Immediately
afterwards, his government moved to restore cordial relations with South
Korea. Mr Xi is due to meet Mr Moon on the sidelines of the Asia-Pacific
Economic Co-operation (APEC) summit, a pow-wow in Vietnam on
November 10th and 11th that Mr Trump is also attending. Mr Moon will
affirm that South Korea does not plan more THAAD batteries for now, and
will not join any wider security initiative aimed at China. Mr Xi might, in
other words, be able to drive a bit of a wedge between America and South
Korea.

As for Mr Trump’s stop in Beijing, flattery will prevail there, too. Mr Xi has
prepared a reception fit for a monarch (China’s ambassador to Washington
calls it a “state-visit-plus”). Mr Trump, who seems to get along well with
strongmen, appears in awe of Mr Xi’s power. He referred to him as “the king
of China” last month.

In truth, Mr Xi can afford to humour Mr Trump, once a China hawk, in part
because Mr Trump has not been very hawkish in his dealings with China.
Instead, Mr Trump has cosied up to Mr Xi, apparently in the hope that he
would bring Chinese pressure to bear on North Korea. The American
president has praised China for enforcing new UN sanctions barring North
Korea from exporting textiles and limiting its imports of oil. Yet there is little
sign that China is willing to take the one step that might change North
Korea’s behaviour: cutting off its oil supply altogether.

As for trade, American business in China is agape at the skimpy agenda the
administration has crafted for the trip. China is expected to announce some
energy investments in Texas and the Virgin Islands. There might be orders
for passenger planes, along with concessions on American credit cards, long
in the works. But this would be small stuff. Instead of the American side
bringing a list of specific demands, it is asking for a broad attitudinal shift by
the Chinese government (ie, stop giving Chinese firms an “unfair
advantage”). American bureaucrats, at Mr Trump’s behest, are conducting a
formal investigation of predatory Chinese trade practices, but it is not due to
report for months. No wonder China’s leaders deem the bilateral relationship

to be as good as it has ever been—“a blessing to the world”, as the People’s
Daily, a state-run newspaper, puts it.

Mr Trump’s trip is a missed opportunity. As Douglas Paal of the Carnegie
Endowment for International Peace argues, the point at which Mr Xi has
consolidated his power would have been the right one for an American
president to explain how his country wants to preserve its interests in Asia
without bringing on a clash. A discussion could have involved contingencies
on the Korean peninsula, and avoiding conflict in the South China Sea. An
administration more clear-eyed about what is at stake for America might have
taken more seriously China’s “belt-and-road” initiative, linking Asia by land
and sea to the Middle East and beyond.

Possibly, Mr Trump will offer a competing vision in the coming days along
the lines proposed last month by his secretary of state, Rex Tillerson, of a
“free and open Indo-Pacific”, in which Australia, India, Japan and even
Vietnam will help America counter China’s maritime expansion. But the idea
is bankrupt if America is against free and open trade. What is more, Mr
Trump has decided to cut his Asia trip short and so will miss the East Asia
Summit in Manila, the main annual get-together for the region’s leaders. Mr
Xi is attending.

This article was downloaded by calibre from
https://www.economist.com/news/asia/21730919-he-gets-little-credit-showing-up-donald-
trumps-agenda-asia-mystery/print

| Section menu | Main menu |

| Next | Section menu | Main menu | Previous |

Meet and retreat

Donald Trump has friends, but few ambitions, in South-East Asia

He is happy to gladhand the region’s strongmen

Nov 2nd 2017 | Singapore

AMONG recent guests to the White House, Donald Trump has welcomed
Prayuth Chan-ocha, the Thai general who overthrew an elected government
in 2014, and Najib Razak, the prime minister of Malaysia, whom America’s
Justice Department has accused of participating in the theft of as much as
$3.5bn from a Malaysian government fund. Mr Trump has referred to Mr
Najib as “my favourite prime minister”. Mr Trump’s presidency has
coincided with a lurch towards authoritarianism around South-East Asia.
Such matters seem to be far less of a concern to him, however, than they were
to his predecessor, Barack Obama. For the region’s democrats, the
discrepancy stings.

On his visit to Asia next week, Mr Trump will call on Rodrigo Duterte, the
president of the Philippines, who has boasted about killing people and has
instituted a campaign against drug dealers and users that has led to perhaps

9,000 deaths. Mr Trump apparently commended Mr Duterte in a phone call
earlier this year for doing an “unbelievable job” fighting drugs. Mr Trump
will also visit Vietnam to attend a big international summit in Danang next
week, ahead of which the Communist Party is repressing dissent especially
fiercely.

Cambodia, Malaysia and Thailand are all expected to hold elections in the
next year, which their current leaders are preparing to manipulate in various
ways to prolong their grip on power. American pressure might have helped
restrain them; the lack of it seems likely to embolden them. They can
certainly count on China for support. As the region becomes increasingly
illiberal, journalists and opposition politicians are suffering. Mere social-
media posts land government critics in court and in jail.

Admittedly, America has never been especially forceful about promoting
human rights and democracy in South-East Asia. Its diplomats continue to
condemn abuses in much the manner they always have. But these days, they
say, they struggle to convince locals that their country cares.

American warships do still conduct freedom of navigation operations in the
South China Sea, helping to resist China’s expansive territorial claims there,
points out Ian Storey of the ISEAS-Yusof Ishak Institute, a think-tank in
Singapore. But America does not seem to have a broader plan to counter
Chinese influence in South-East Asia, or to promote its own values in the
region. One of Mr Obama’s tools for doing that had been the Trans-Pacific
Partnership (TPP) trade deal, which would have obliged Vietnam, for
example, to allow independent trade unions. Mr Trump’s first big Asian
initiative was to withdraw from TPP. In its place, he seems to imagine a
system of warm personal ties with the region’s many strongmen.

This article was downloaded by calibre from
https://www.economist.com/news/asia/21730916-he-happy-gladhand-regions-strongmen-
donald-trump-has-friends-few-ambitions/print

| Section menu | Main menu |

| Next | Section menu | Main menu | Previous |

Ignorance is no excuse

An antiquated rule claims another scalp in Australia’s parliament

How many more MPs will turn out to be ineligible because they are dual
nationals?

Nov 2nd 2017 | SYDNEY

WHERE will it end? On October 27th the High Court stripped four senators
and an MP of their seats, adopting a strict interpretation of the rules on
eligibility for parliament. The MP was Barnaby Joyce, the deputy prime
minister, whose ejection has cost the government its majority in the lower
house. Then on November 1st Stephen Parry, the president of the Senate,
announced that he, too, suffered from the same affliction: he was a dual
national, able to claim British citizenship as well as Australian. He resigned
the following day.

Mr Joyce was one of the “citizenship seven”, parliamentarians who
discovered that they were deemed to be citizens, variously, of Britain,
Canada, Italy and New Zealand, even though they had not formally claimed
citizenship. Australia’s constitution bans from parliament anyone who is

under “acknowledgment of allegiance, obedience or adherence to a foreign
power”, or who is a citizen of a “foreign power”.

The government’s lawyers argued that the ban should apply only if someone
actively laid claim to a foreign nationality, not if they were ignorant that they
were considered a citizen of another country, as the “citizenship seven”
claimed to be. But the judges pointed out that parliamentary candidates must
complete a nomination form that asks whether they might be ineligible
because they are dual citizens. This, they said, is “manifestly an occasion for
serious reflection on this question”.

As a result, the court removed five of the seven parliamentarians. It let off
Matt Canavan, a senator from the Nationals, the junior party in the governing
coalition, because it was unclear whether he was really an Italian citizen.
Nick Xenophon, another senator, escaped because his form of British
nationality, “a British overseas citizen”, conveyed so few rights that it was
unworthy of the name, in the court’s view.

Mr Joyce’s ejection is a headache for the government. Although he was born
in Australia, he learned in August that he was also considered a New
Zealander because his father had been born in New Zealand before moving to
Australia in 1947. Having renounced his Kiwi citizenship, Mr Joyce will try
to reclaim his constituency at a by-election on December 2nd. Opinion polls
suggest he has a good chance. In the meantime the government will control
only 74 of the 150 seats in the lower house, not counting that of the speaker.
It hopes to soldier through the final session of the year with the help of
independents.

The government already lacks a majority in the Senate, so the dismissal of
the senators will not affect its functioning. Nevertheless, Mr Parry’s case
matters because he is the first member of the Liberal Party of the prime
minister, Malcolm Turnbull, to fall foul of the citizenship rules. It transpires
that he is a British citizen through his father, who emigrated to Australia in
1951. Mr Turnbull had sneered at the “incredible sloppiness” of some of the
“citizenship seven” for not checking their status. Mr Parry says he waited to
do so until after the High Court’s ruling because it had now provided
“absolute clarity”.

The drama has hastened calls to reform the rules. Australians were considered
British subjects when the constitution came into force 116 years ago.
Australian citizenship was created only in 1948. High levels of immigration
since then have given plenty of people unwitting claims to foreign
nationality. Some constitutional lawyers reckon all 226 federal
parliamentarians should now have their backgrounds audited in a bid to clear
up the mess. A parliamentary committee 20 years ago called for the
constitution to be changed to allow any Australian citizen to serve in
parliament. That would require a referendum, few of which succeed.

Mr Turnbull has bravely asked a parliamentary committee to suggest a way
forward. Meanwhile he insists that “the business of government goes on.”
Perhaps—but it has definitely become harder.

This article was downloaded by calibre from
https://www.economist.com/news/asia/21730915-how-many-more-mps-will-turn-out-be-
ineligible-because-they-are-dual-nationals-antiquated-rule/print

| Section menu | Main menu |

| Next | Section menu | Main menu | Previous |

Tax brake

India’s previously unstoppable ruling party loses momentum

The cumbersome new goods-and-services tax has gone down badly

Nov 2nd 2017 | Delhi

IF SUCCESS is the sweetest revenge then the makers of “Mersal”, a Tamil-
language action-romance, must be feeling smug. Supporters of the Hindu
nationalist Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) vented fury when the film was
released in mid-October. Some shouted that it should be banned, unless a
scene mocking government policy was cut. Others sniffed that the film’s lack
of patriotic spirit might reflect the fact that its star, Thalapathy Vijay, is
Christian. But for “Mersal” all this ugly talk was just good publicity: it has
already grossed over $32m, close to a record for Tamil cinema.

The backfiring of this attack might be read as a parable for the troubles facing
the BJP. It had seemed an unstoppable juggernaut, set to roll through a string
of state polls up to the next general election in 2019 and beyond. It still holds
trumps that any party would envy: a network of more than 110m members,
generous funding, a largely sympathetic press and an energetic, charismatic

leader in Narendra Modi, the prime minister. His government can also claim
solid achievements: it is currently trumpeting India’s 30-rung climb up the
World Bank’s Ease of Doing Business ranking in a year, to 100th place.
Besides, the opposition remains feeble and divided.

Yet a series of costly policy flops, along with an accumulation of dents to the
party’s clean image, have combined to put Mr Modi on the defensive. For six
weeks last winter Indians scrambled to make ends meet when the government
abruptly scrapped 86% of the country’s cash. Many suffered cheerfully,
believing they were helping Mr Modi chase money-hoarding bad guys. But
as time has passed, few can see any gain from the pain.

Eight months after “demonetisation”, the government launched a national
goods-and-services tax (GST) with fanfare. It is meant to unify and simplify
India’s bewildering array of state and local taxes, thereby helping business
and boosting revenue. So far, it has done neither. To its credit, Mr Modi’s
government has responded to complaints by exempting more of the tiniest
firms from the tax and pushing back filing deadlines. Even so, the complex,
six-tiered tax, requiring multiple filings and hefty upfront payments on inputs
with only sluggish reimbursement, has proved so burdensome to small
businesses that many have scaled back work. Consumers, meanwhile, are
cross about high rates on certain items (28% on shampoo).

As with demonetisation, the GST roll-out appears to have been sloppy and
hasty. A more recent reform, a big bail-out of state-owned banks saddled
with some $150bn in rotten loans, is neither of those things. The rescue
package is cleverly devised, but woefully late: Mr Modi had ignored repeated
warnings, notably from Raghuram Rajan, his own central-bank chief who
was sacked last year, that the debt pile was smothering investment.

For the Indian public, policy foibles would be more forgivable if they were
not accompanied by so much hype, as well as by aggressive attacks on critics.
A scene in “Mersal” that the BJP found offensive, for instance, included a
rant against GST. Within hours of airing a report suggesting that the son of
the BJP’s powerful president, Amit Shah, has profited in business since the
party came to power, the Wire, an online news magazine, was fiercely
attacked by ministers and slapped with both a gag order and a criminal
lawsuit. Authors of books investigating wealthy patrons of the party have

been similarly assailed. Such pressures, as well as threats to advertising, have
prompted wary media groups to fire critical editors. Ordinary citizens have
also been hauled to court after posting jokes about Mr Modi on social media.

One person who is joking more at Mr Modi’s expense is Rahul Gandhi, a
scion of the Nehru-Gandhi family who is expected to be anointed head of the
opposition Congress Party soon. Mr Gandhi, who until recently was widely
regarded as a political weakling, has begun offering a steady barrage of
acerbic barbs, to growing effect. In the past few months his following on
Twitter has grown by two-thirds, threatening the BJP’s dominance of social
media.

Congress is also mounting an unexpectedly strong challenge to the BJP in Mr
Modi’s home state of Gujarat, which holds elections in December. The BJP
has reigned there for nearly 20 years, and few expect it to be unseated. Yet
Mr Modi is taking no chances. He has campaigned furiously and showered
the state with handouts. If the BJP loses even a little ground, some will say its
efforts backfired.

This article was downloaded by calibre from
https://www.economist.com/news/asia/21730918-cumbersome-new-goods-and-services-tax-
has-gone-down-badly-indias-previously-unstoppable-ruling/print

| Section menu | Main menu |

| Next | Section menu | Main menu | Previous |

Apostrophes on the march

Kazakhstan wants Kazakh written in Latin, not Cyrillic script

But it’s going to take a lot of diacritical marks

Nov 2nd 2017 | ALMATY

RARELY has the humble apostrophe caused such commotion. Nursultan
Nazarbayev, Kazakhstan’s president, wants the punctuation symbol to play a
much bigger part in public life. Ordinary Kazakhs are objecting. Some feel so
strongly that they have launched an anti-apostrophe campaign on social
media, adorning their Facebook pages with crossed-out apostrophes.

At issue is the apostrophe-peppered alphabet that the government wants to
introduce over the next eight years, to replace the current rendering of the
Kazakh language in Cyrillic—the alphabet used to write Russian, among
other languages. The new script is a modified form of the Latin alphabet,
which is used to write not only English but many other languages, including
Turkic ones related to Kazakh, such as Turkish.

Officially, the switch is about equipping Kazakhstan for the digital age. (The

new script should be easier to type and to render online.) But the change is
also to do with decolonisation. Kazakhstan was a part first of the Russian
empire and then of the Soviet one, for over 250 years all told. Over that time,
Russian administrators promoted the Russian language; Kazakh nearly died
out. To this day only 62% of the population speaks Kazakh well, whereas
nearly all speak Russian.

In 1940 the Soviet authorities decreed that Kazakh should be written in
Cyrillic. (The only indigenous alphabet is a system of ancient runes; Arabic
and Latin letters had also been used previously.) But the version of Cyrillic
the Soviets adopted was unnecessarily cumbersome, with 42 letters, including
several representing sounds that do not occur in Kazakh, such as shch and ts.
The new script will have a mere 32 letters: 23 ordinary Latin ones (c, w and x
did not make the cut), and nine with apostrophes.

Many Kazakhs support the idea of changing the alphabet, but are irritated by
the lack of any formal public consultation and puzzled that the government
seems to be reinventing the wheel, rather than adapting the version of the
Latin alphabet that Turks use, say. The government floated another version of
a Latin script, featuring digraphs (pairings of letters to represent a single
sound, such as sh or ch in English), but it was mercilessly lampooned.
Delighted critics pointed out that the rendering of the Kazakh word for carrot
in that alphabet would have been saebiz, which looks a bit like a
transliteration of the Russian for “fuck off”. More substantively, some argued
that it would be simpler to represent each distinct sound with a single letter.

In theory, that is what the new alphabet does, with the help of all those
apostrophes. But it is far from elegant. Aktau, a hub of the oil industry, will
become Aq’tay’. Kazakhstan will become Qazaqstan. It is not clear that the
shift will help Kazakh supplant Russian, which remains the lingua franca and
retains its protected status, to the relief of the fifth of the population who are
ethnically Russian. But it will at least look more distinct.

This article was downloaded by calibre from
https://www.economist.com/news/asia/21730917-its-going-take-lot-diacritical-marks-
kazakhstan-wants-kazakh-written-latin-not/print

| Section menu | Main menu |

| Next section | Main menu | Previous section |

China

Trafficking women: Fear on the border [Thu, 02 Nov 23:23]
Banyan: The rise and rise of Wang Huning [Thu, 02 Nov 23:23]

| Next section | Main menu | Previous section |

| Next | Section menu | Main menu |

Bridal paths

Demand for wives in China endangers women who live on its borders

Local residents often turn a blind eye to trafficking

Nov 4th 2017 | BEIJING AND LAO CAI

HUONG was only 15 when she went out to meet a friend in Lao Cai, a city in
northern Vietnam on the Chinese border (see map). She thought she would be
gone a few hours, but it was three years before she managed to return home.
Her friend had brought with her two acquaintances—young men with
motorcycles. They squired the girls around town and took them to a karaoke
bar, where their drinks were spiked.

When the girls grew drowsy they were hoisted back onto the bikes, each
sandwiched between two male riders. They were driven into the hills and
across the Chinese border to a remote house in the countryside. There they
were told they would be sold. The girls screamed and cried but were subdued
by two men, one of them wielding a stick. The traffickers told Huong that by
crossing the border she had sullied her reputation, but that if she behaved
well they would find her a Chinese husband. After marrying she might find a

way home, they said. If she refused she would stay stranded in the hills.

Huong—a pseudonym, to protect her identity—is now 20 years old. She lives
in a large bungalow in Lao Cai, which she shares with a dozen women aged
between 15 and 24 (an occupant is pictured). They are all survivors of
trafficking networks that smuggle girls across the Vietnam-China border,
sometimes to be sold as prostitutes but more often as brides. Their house,
with its enormous teddy bears and fleet of fuchsia-pink bicycles, is a shelter
run by Pacific Links Foundation, an American charity, which helps victims
finish their education and cope with their trauma.

Around the world some 15m people are living in marriages into which they
were forced, including some who were abducted, according to a recent study
by the International Labour Organisation, a UN body, and human-rights
groups. In China the trafficking of women is particularly acute, in part
because a preference for sons has left the country with a severely skewed sex
ratio. Between 1979 and 2015 the imbalance was aggravated by a one-child-
per-couple policy, which prompted many to abort females before they were
born. The Chinese Academy of Social Sciences has estimated that by 2020
there will be 30m-40m Chinese men who will be unable to find wives in their
own country.

One consequence of this is booming business for matchmakers who offer to
import women from China’s poorer neighbours, particularly Laos, Myanmar,
Cambodia, Vietnam, Mongolia and North Korea. Some of these women,
seeking a route out of poverty at home, freely choose a Chinese marriage and

gain the necessary approvals. But along China’s borders, kidnapping is rife.

The stories told by trafficking survivors and Vietnamese officials in Lao Cai
shed light on this grim trade. Each year between 100 and 150 trafficked
Vietnamese women return to their country through the town’s border gate,
says an official there—probably only a small proportion of the total who are
lured or abducted the other way. Some of the victims’ ordeals begin when,
like Huong, they are drugged or kidnapped. Others are duped into thinking
they are going to a party or to meet a potential boyfriend. Sometimes
members of their own families are complicit.

Groomed online

Diep Vuong of Pacific Links thinks victims are getting younger (in China,
women have to be at least 20 to get married, but marriages to abducted
foreigners are often unregistered). The spread of cheap smartphones and
improvements in mobile networks are making it easier for traffickers to use
social media to befriend schoolgirls in Vietnam’s hills. These criminals earn
as little as $50 for each woman they bring into China, where they are often
resold far inland by middlemen. Chinese police report that at their final
destination Vietnamese women fetch prices of between around 60,000 and
100,000 yuan ($9,000-15,000).

Some snatched women and girls return home swiftly. A 17-year-old who
lives at the bungalow with Huong says she was gone for only two days before
a woman on the Chinese side of the border helped her to escape. A fellow
resident, who returned from China a month ago, walks with a limp. She says
she broke her leg leaping from the house in which her traffickers were
holding her. Chinese police later found her lying in the street.

Huong’s story is longer. She was kept at her traffickers’ house and threatened
for two months. When she finally agreed to be married she was driven for
two days to a city in Anhui, a province north-west of Shanghai. She was
warned not to let her new family find out that she was Vietnamese. She was
to pretend to be a Chinese citizen belonging to an ethnic minority with cross-
border cultural links.

The man to whom she was sold into marriage was in his early 20s. He was

from a wealthy family, which had paid 90,000 yuan for her. Her husband
explained that he had not really wanted to get married, but that his parents
were keen. They had told him that an ethnic-minority bride would be more
obedient than someone from the ethnic-Han majority. Such claims are
commonly made by matchmakers. One Chinese mail-order marriage site says
Vietnamese women are cheap, obedient and unlikely to run away: they are
“so gentle and loving they will make you melt”.

The greatest demand for foreign wives is in the countryside, particularly
among men who are poor or disabled, says Jiang Quanbao of Xi’an Jiaotong
University. In rural areas not only is the sex ratio an impediment to finding a
bride, so too is the migration of women to the cities in search of work and
higher-status males. Impoverished villages sometimes end up with dozens of
foreign wives, as word spreads of their availability.

Villagers often have sympathy for the buyers—they may even help to prevent
trafficked women from fleeing. Escape is not at all simple for women without
money of their own and with limited Chinese-language skills. North Koreans
who contact the authorities risk being repatriated and then sent to
concentration camps. That makes them particularly vulnerable to traffickers.
Amid rising tensions on the Korean peninsula caused by North Korea’s
nuclear tests, police in nearby Chinese provinces are becoming more
watchful for unauthorised migrants from across the border, including North
Korean women who have been sold into marriage.

Once victims become mothers, their decisions about whether and how to
leave China become even more difficult. So it was for Huong. She had been
taken to Anhui with another Vietnamese girl who was being sold into the
same district. The pair agreed that they would find a way home together. But
their plan had to be postponed soon after arrival, because Huong’s friend
became pregnant. By the time the baby was delivered Huong was expecting a
child, too. Less than a month after she gave birth, Huong’s in-laws sent her to
live and work at a textile factory nearly four hours away, leaving her baby
behind. Her husband would turn up on payday to collect most of her wages—
about 6,000 yuan a month. Eventually Huong concluded that the family
meant to keep her estranged from her daughter. She resolved to escape back
to Vietnam.

Huong scraped together enough money to travel independently. Her own
parents, whom she had managed to contact a few months after reaching
Anhui, helped her work out where best to present herself to the authorities.
The Chinese police kept her for three months while they investigated her
story, after which they arrested some of the people involved in trafficking
her. Then they sent her back to Vietnam, though her baby remained in China.

In June the American government reported that China was “not making
significant efforts” to tackle human trafficking. It relegated China to the ranks
of countries, such as Venezuela, Turkmenistan and South Sudan, which it
rates as the worst for their record in dealing with the problem. But Chinese
police say they are not sitting on their hands. They report that between 2009
and the middle of last year, they “rescued several thousand women of foreign
nationality” in anti-trafficking operations that involved co-operation with
their counterparts in Vietnam, Myanmar and Laos (pictured are victims being
sent back to Vietnam by Chinese police in 2015). More than 1,000 people
were arrested for related crimes.

In some provinces government registrars are trying to spot unwilling foreign
brides by hiring staff with knowledge of regional languages. The government
says that stricter policing last year in the borderlands reduced trafficking from

Vietnam.

It is difficult, however, to prosecute people for buying abducted women. In
2015 the law was revised to make legal action easier. But the law says that, in
cases where the woman wants to return and the buyer does not try to prevent
it, punishment can be lighter or the sentence can be commuted. Cross-border
operations remain hostage to China’s relations with its neighbours. Ties with
Vietnam, an age-old rival, are often frosty.

Huong is now finishing high school, and hopes to study medicine. She says
she “will not regret” having to leave her daughter in China. A baby would
have been a burden on her family in Vietnam, and she worried that having no
father would thrust the child into a legal limbo. Her in-laws were wealthy, at
least, and seemed devoted to her daughter, she says. They were “good
people.”

This article was downloaded by calibre from
https://www.economist.com/news/china/21730920-local-residents-often-turn-blind-eye-
trafficking-demand-wives-china-endangers-women-who/print

| Section menu | Main menu |

| Next | Section menu | Main menu | Previous |

Banyan

The meaning of the man behind China’s ideology

Why Wang Huning is a name to remember

Nov 2nd 2017

THERE is really only one intellectual pursuit as unhealthy as a burning drive
to reach the Standing Committee of the Politburo of the Chinese Communist
Party, and that is a morbid fascination with the apparatchiks—their faces
pasty and most of their hair unnaturally black—that compose it. But bear
with this column. For in the new seven-man line-up at the top of China’s
leadership that was unveiled last week is a striking character: a 62-year-old,
Wang Huning.

It is probable that Mr Wang will be put in charge of the party’s ideology and
propaganda. He, along with Huang Kunming, the head of the propaganda
department, whom Mr Wang will oversee, are loyal supporters of China’s
paramount leader, Xi Jinping. Perhaps that is not a surprise, but it is worth
stating, because through Mr Wang, Mr Xi now has even greater control of a
vast and essential part of the Communist Party apparatus, something that is

not foreordained for the ruler.

The fascinating part is that Mr Wang is not himself a creation of the
propaganda system. He is not like his predecessors in the job, who spouted
party-speak in their sleep. He has a mind of his own. And it has already done
much to help reshape official thinking, putting ideology—broadly defined—
at the heart of what the party is attempting to do.

In the 1980s and early 1990s, as a precocious law professor at Fudan
University in Shanghai, Mr Wang grappled with the political consequences of
Deng Xiaoping’s liberalising reforms. They had led to a swift rise in living
standards as peasants left collectives and profitably farmed their own plots,
jumped into business or left to work in the cities. But that contributed to “a
hollowing-out of Beijing’s control over its far-flung territories”, as Jude
Blanchette of the Conference Board, an American research organisation,
explains in a blog post about Wang Huning. Mr Wang set about justifying a
new political approach.

A notable aspect of Mr Wang’s intellectual history is that, unlike any other
senior leader’s since Mao Zedong, it has been surprisingly well documented,
through numerous writings—at least until he was plucked from academia in
the mid-1990s for higher things. He once described Mao’s Cultural
Revolution (from which, as a youth, ill health largely spared him) as “an
unprecedented political catastrophe”. By the 1980s even Chinese of a
relatively liberal bent were attracted to the notion that profound social and
economic change required a central authority to oversee it. Mr Wang
provided the intellectual justification for “neo-authoritarianism”, with
political liberties and democracy coming much later. This notion gained
added salience after the chaos of 1989, the year of the massacre around
Tiananmen Square. Mr Wang’s thinking helped to convince leaders that they
should recentralise power and exert it more forcefully.

In the early 1990s Mr Wang also delved more deeply than most into the
political consequences of corruption. Graft at the highest levels, he wrote,
was far more corrosive than that lower down, since it undermined trust in
government. He warned that it could lead China to the same fate as the Soviet
Union. In focusing on this threat he presaged the phenomenon of Xi Jinping,
who has fought against graft with unprecedented zeal.

In fact, Mr Wang helped to mould Xi Jinping’s thinking—as well as,
remarkably, that of Mr Xi’s two predecessors, Hu Jintao and Jiang Zemin. By
1995 Mr Wang had come to the attention of Mr Jiang, who drafted him into
the Central Policy Research Office, the party’s highest think-tank, which to
this day has no public website or telephone number. There, he devised Mr
Jiang’s “Three Represents”, which acknowledged the need for the party to
appeal to more Chinese, including private businesspeople and managers. Mr
Wang later provided a similar service for Mr Hu with his theory of
“Scientific Development”. And his was the brain behind “Xi Jinping
Thought”, which was enshrined in the party constitution late last month.
Central to Xi Thought is the notion of a “Chinese dream” of the country’s
“great revival”—a dollop of nationalism on top of Deng’s pro-market
rhetoric.

Clash of civilisations

Before his elevation to the Standing Committee, Mr Wang was rarely absent
from Mr Xi’s side on his trips abroad—a foreign-policy adviser and crafter of
China’s external messaging too (including the ballyhooed “Belt and Road
Initiative”). Haig Patapan and Yi Wang of Griffith University argue that only
during periods of wrenching change and transition do idea-mongers become
advisers, and advisers come to wield such authority.

It may sound encouraging that Mr Wang studied in America in the late
1980s. He is the first senior leader since the generation of Deng and Zhou
Enlai to have had such Western exposure. But Mr Wang’s experience there
did not entirely inspire him. As Niv Horesh of the University of Nottingham
has shown, Mr Wang’s book on his American sojourn, “America Against
America”, published in 1991, lacks reflective qualities. While deploring
America’s individualism and self-interest, Mr Wang fails to see the reach of
philanthropy and voluntary organisations. And when he points to native
Americans’ lack of political power, he seems blind to the parallel with
Tibetans and Uighurs.

But in ways that would be understood by another adviser who reached the
pinnacle of power, Donald Trump’s former strategist, Stephen Bannon, Mr
Wang sees a world divided by fundamentally different values and cultures.
Mr Wang’s book prophesies that, following the rise of Japan, other races

would challenge American primacy, and the American system based on “self-
defeating” notions such as liberty and democracy would find itself in crisis.
Mr Xi does not yet say this. But he has started to claim that China should
“take centre stage in the world” and that its model of development presents “a
new choice for other countries”. That is Wang-think. Don’t say you were
never warned.

This article was downloaded by calibre from
https://www.economist.com/news/china/21730898-why-wang-huning-name-remember-meaning-
man-behind-chinas-ideology/print

| Section menu | Main menu |

| Next section | Main menu | Previous section |

Middle East and Africa

Illiberal liberalism: The new Arab cosmopolitans [Thu, 02 Nov 23:23]
Jews in Morocco: Shalom alaykum [Thu, 02 Nov 23:23]
Land grabs in Syria: Bulldozing over the revolution [Thu, 02 Nov
Polarised politics in Kenya: Kenyatta’s hollow victory [Thu, 02
Zimbabwe’s deepening crisis: Surviving under Mugabe [Thu,

Nov 23:23]

23:23]

02 Nov 23:23]

| Next section | Main menu | Previous section |

| Next | Section menu | Main menu |

The new Arab cosmopolitans

Despots are pushing the Arab world to become more secular

But they are consolidating their own power in the process

Nov 2nd 2017 | CAIRO

DURING Friday prayers the congregation of Muhammad Yousef, a young
puritanical preacher in the Egyptian town of Mansoura, once spilled out into
the alleys surrounding his mosque. Now Sheikh Muhammad counts it a good
week if he fills half the place.

In Cairo, 110km (68 miles) to the south, unveiled women sit in street cafés,
traditionally a male preserve, smoking water-pipes. Some of the
establishments serve alcohol, which Islam prohibits. “We’re in religious
decline,” moans Sheikh Muhammad, whose despair is shared by clerics in
many parts of the Arab world.

According to Arab Barometer, a pollster, much of the region is growing less
religious. Voters who backed Islamists after the upheaval of the Arab spring
in 2011 have grown disillusioned with their performance and changed their

minds. In Egypt support for imposing sharia (Islamic law) fell from 84% in
2011 to 34% in 2016. Egyptians are praying less, too (see chart). In places
such as Lebanon and Morocco only half as many Muslims listen to recitals of
the Koran today, compared with 2011. Gender equality in education and the
workplace, long hindered by Muslim tradition, is widely accepted. “Society is
driving change,” says Michael Robbins, an American who heads Barometer.

But so, too, is a new crop of Arab leaders, who have adjusted their policies in
line with the zeitgeist. They are acting, in part, out of political self-interest.

The region’s authoritarians, who once tried to co-opt Islamists, now view
them as the biggest threat to their rule. By curbing the influence of clerics
they are also weakening checks on their own power. Still, many Arab leaders
seem genuinely interested in moulding more secular and tolerant societies,
even if their reforms do not extend to the political sphere.

The United Arab Emirates (UAE) has led the way in relaxing religious and
social restrictions. While leading a regional campaign against Islamist
movements, Muhammad bin Zayed, the crown prince of Abu Dhabi and the
UAE’s de facto leader, has financed the construction of Western university
branches and art galleries. He has encouraged young women out of domestic
seclusion and into military service, his daughter included. Female soldiers
often walk the streets in uniform. In marked contrast to the region’s post-
independence nationalist leaders, who purged their societies of Armenians,
Greeks, Italians and Jews, he has embraced diversity, though tough
restrictions on citizenship persist.

In Egypt President Abdel-Fattah al-Sisi has not only banned the Muslim
Brotherhood, the region’s pre-eminent Islamist movement, but denounced al-
Azhar, the Muslim world’s oldest seat of learning, for “intolerance”. He has
closed thousands of mosques and said that Muslims must not sacrifice sheep
in their homes during festivals without a licence. On some beaches burkinis
—body-covering swimwear for conservative women—are banned. In a break
from his predecessors, Mr Sisi has attended Christmas mass in Cairo’s Coptic
cathedral three years in a row (though he doesn’t stay long). “We’re
becoming more European,” explains an Egyptian official.

The most remarkable, albeit nascent, transformation is in ultra-conservative
Saudi Arabia, where Muhammad bin Salman, the young crown prince, has
curbed the religious police, sacked thousands of imams and launched a new
Centre for Moderation to censor “fake and extremist texts”. Women will soon
be allowed to drive cars and enter sports stadiums. They are already
encouraged to work. Now Prince Muhammad wants to create a new city,
Neom, that seems modelled on freewheeling Dubai. Its promotional videos
show women without headscarves partying with men. “We are only returning
to what we used to be, to moderate Islam, open to the world and all
religions,” he told foreign investors in October.

This move to moderation is far from ubiquitous. In countries with less
dynamic governments, such as Algeria, Jordan and Palestine, polls show that
support for sharia and sympathy for Islamist movements is high and growing.
But secularists can been found in even the most conservative quarters. Freed
from the grip of Islamic State (IS) jihadists, residents of Mosul, in Iraq,
congregate in revamped cafés that have sprouted around the city’s wrecked
university. Many profess to be atheists. The fine-arts department is reopening
after it was closed by IS three years ago, with twice its previous intake of
students.

Economic hardship, long seen as fuelling Islamist opposition movements,
may also be eroding traditional views on women’s role in society. Amid
soaring inflation and subsidy cuts in many countries, one salary is rarely
enough to support a family. So husbands encourage their wives to work.
Daughters are leaving their homes in rural areas to study or work in cities.
Health workers say premarital sex is more common, in part because the age
of marriage is rising (many blame high living costs).

Moderation without representation

All of the change is bittersweet for the region’s liberals, who want more
political openness, too. But Arab leaders are acting much like Kemal Ataturk,
Turkey’s dictator in the early 20th century, who abolished the caliphate and
sharia, and banned traditional garb, all while consolidating his own power.

In implementing his modernising agenda, Prince Muhammad has
downgraded his family’s 250-year-old alliance with the Wahhabist clergy,
who enforced a puritanical version of Islam and seemed to rule Saudi Arabia
alongside the House of Saud. Now clerics who push back too hard against
decrees are muzzled—or arrested. Dozens of public figures (including
liberals) who were critical of the prince’s policies were detained in
September.

Similarly, Mr Sisi fans criticism of religious movements, while censoring
even indirect barbs of his rule. He has banned hundreds of newspapers and
websites, and muzzled artists and musicians who might provoke opposition.

Yet many Arabs seem ready to forfeit political rights in exchange for

personal liberties. A poll this year named the UAE as the state Arabs most
want to live in, despite its dearth of democratic rights. But secularisation may
last only as long as the despots pushing the plan. And even they may not go
as far as activists want. No sooner had Saudi women won the right to drive
than some took their bicycles out on the roads, testing the limits of official
tolerance.

This article was downloaded by calibre from https://www.economist.com/news/middle-
east-and-africa/21730899-they-are-consolidating-their-own-power-process-despots-are-
pushing/print

| Section menu | Main menu |

| Next | Section menu | Main menu | Previous |

A moment of religious harmony

Morocco’s little idyll of Jewish-Muslim coexistence

Essaouira sets an example for the rest of the Middle East

Nov 2nd 2017 | ESSAOUIRA

ONCE a year the little seaside town of Essaouira, in Morocco, reclaims its
lost Jewish community. Sephardic trills echo from its whitewashed
synagogues. The medieval souks fill with Jewish skullcaps. Rabbis and
cantors wish Muslims “Shabbat Shalom” and regale them with Hebrew
incantations. “It’s our culture,” says a merchant from Marrakech, who
travelled 200km (124 miles) to hear them this year.

The revival is the initiative of André Azoulay, a 76-year-old Jew from
Essaouira (one of just three) and a former counsellor to Morocco’s kings.
Each autumn he stages a colourful festival of Andalusian music aimed at
bringing hundreds of Jews and Muslims together for a weekend of concerts
and dialogue. Locals pack the small stadium to watch Hebrew cantors and
Koran-reciters sing arm-in-arm. Israelis and Palestinians flock there, too.
“Essaouira is what the Middle East once was and might yet be again,” says

Mr Azoulay.

When Jews were expelled from Spain and Portugal in the 15th century, many
fled to Morocco. The Jewish population in the kingdom rose to over 250,000
by 1948, when the state of Israel was born. In the ensuing decades, as Arab-
Jewish tensions increased, many left. Fewer than 2,500 remain—still more
than anywhere else in the Arab world.

No Arab country has gone to the lengths of Morocco to revive its Jewish
heritage. The kingdom has restored 110 synagogues, such as Slat Lkahal,
which opened in Essaouira during the festival. A centre for Judeo-Islamic
studies is set to open in the old kasbah later this year. The kingdom also
boasts the Arab world’s only Jewish museum. “We used to have a six-pointed
star on our flag and coins, like Israel,” says Zhor Rehihil, the curator (who is
Muslim). “It was changed under French rule to five.”

Morocco and Israel have no formal diplomatic relations, but over 50,000
Israelis visit the kingdom each year. A new charter flight from Tel Aviv to
Casablanca, Morocco’s largest city, began operating this summer. It stops in
Malta for half an hour to maintain the pretence that there are still no direct
flights between the countries. Morocco also issues hundreds of passports each
year to Israeli Jews of Moroccan descent, of whom there are almost half a
million—“the better to travel in the Arab world,” says a recent recipient. It
takes a month, no security questions asked.

Mr Azoulay urges Israeli visitors to spread word of his idyll of coexistence
when they return home. Some doubt the warmth is transferable. One visiting
Israeli official puts it thus: “Morocco’s Arabs are different to ours.”

This article was downloaded by calibre from https://www.economist.com/news/middle-
east-and-africa/21730897-essaouira-sets-example-rest-middle-east-moroccos-little-
idyll/print

| Section menu | Main menu |

| Next | Section menu | Main menu | Previous |

Bulldozing over the revolution

Syria’s regime is stealing land from its opponents

Bashar al-Assad hopes to raise skyscrapers, hotels and restaurants from the
rubble of the war he started

Nov 2nd 2017 | BEIRUT

YOUSOF AKASHEH, a rebel fighter, was astonished to find out that the
regime of Bashar al-Assad in Syria was planning to seize his wife’s property.
For one thing, she is dead, killed three years ago when a warplane bombed
her apartment block. For another, she never owned property.

Such is the arbitrariness of the regime’s counter-terrorism court, which has
branded tens of thousands of opponents of Mr Assad enemies of the state and
sent them to the country’s hellish prisons. Those lucky enough to escape
arrest are tried in absentia. As punishment, the court routinely seizes their
property.

The civil war in Syria has driven more than 12m people from their homes,
contributing to the largest refugee crisis in recent history. But in his typically

appalling way, Mr Assad has spied opportunity amid the tragedy. “We have
lost the best of our young people…but in return we have gained a healthier
and more harmonious society,” the dictator said in August of a war that has
killed more than 400,000 of his countrymen.

Mr Assad is determined to keep it that way by making it exceedingly hard for
those who have left to return to their homes. Property registries have been
deliberately bombed, title deeds are seized at military checkpoints and new
laws have been passed to make it easier for the regime to grab land,
businesses and homes. In some parts of the country the regime has rewarded
loyalists with property confiscated from its opponents. In other parts,
bulldozers have simply flattened neighbourhoods that sided with the rebels.
Large tracts of public land in cities are also quietly slipping into the hands of
officials and connected businessmen.

Some of Syria’s poorest areas, where many of the first anti-regime protests
flared in 2011 and where most of the destruction has occurred, will be rebuilt
without their unruly residents. The regime hopes to move forward with
projects that were deeply unpopular before the war, raising skyscrapers,
hotels and restaurants from the rubble. Lacking enough cash of its own, it has
passed laws to encourage private investors to pay for the reconstruction. But
few investors will build residences if there are no people to live in them.

Half of Syria’s pre-war population is scattered. Many have already sought
new homes abroad, away from a ruler who has systematically bombed,
starved and tortured his own people. Even if the displaced return to their
neighbourhoods, few will be able to afford the regime’s housing,
exacerbating inequality that has grown worse during the conflict. Experts
predict that 2m lawsuits will be filed after the war by people seeking
restitution for damaged or stolen property. The courts may buckle under the
burden.

The regime is not the only side to have grabbed land during the war. Kurds in
northern Syria have claimed Arab lands freed from the Islamic State group,
which itself used stolen property to buy loyalty. “The destabilising potential
of all this is pretty fearsome,” says Rhodri Williams of the International
Legal Assistance Consortium. “Few things stay in the minds of people longer
than the property that was taken away from them.”

This article was downloaded by calibre from https://www.economist.com/news/middle-
east-and-africa/21730892-bashar-al-assad-hopes-raise-skyscrapers-hotels-and-
restaurants-rubble/print

| Section menu | Main menu |

| Next | Section menu | Main menu | Previous |

Polarised politics in Kenya

Uhuru Kenyatta’s hollow victory

The president’s landslide re-election is marred by a boycott

Nov 2nd 2017 | NAIROBI

KENYA, according to its deputy president, William Ruto, “is not the type of
country where you find a president getting 99% of the vote”. That statement,
made on October 16th, was tested just a week later when Kenyans went to the
polls for a re-run of the election on August 8th, which the country’s supreme
court annulled. When the final results were announced by the electoral
commission on October 30th, Uhuru Kenyatta, the incumbent, had won
(again) with 98.3% of the vote. Yet the sweeping victory seems unlikely to
bring to an end Kenya’s political and emerging economic crises.

The reason for Mr Kenyatta’s huge victory was that his main opponent, Raila
Odinga, an opposition stalwart and perennial candidate, withdrew from the
race and called on his supporters to refuse to vote. Turnout collapsed to just
38% from almost 80% in the annulled poll of August. In two of Kenya’s 47
counties—both strongholds of Mr Odinga in western Kenya—voting did not
happen at all, as Mr Odinga’s supporters prevented officials from opening
polling stations.

In the end, turnout strongly reflected Kenya’s political (and ethnic) make-up.
In the central region, where Mr Kenyatta’s tribe, the Kikuyu, are most
concentrated, voters still crowded the polls (see map). In Kiambu, his home
county, turnout was 78%, compared with 83% in August. A similar pattern
held in Mr Ruto’s Kalenjin heartlands in the Rift Valley. By contrast, in pro-
Odinga areas, dominated by the Luo, the boycott was clearest. In Mombasa,
Kenya’s second-largest city, turnout fell from 59% to just 14%.

The worry for Mr Kenyatta is what happens next. After the results were
declared, Mr Odinga gave a speech in which he denounced the “sham
election” and called for a “people’s assembly” to resist the government. He
has said he will not go back to court, but if he does, the logic of the previous
annulment suggests he has a chance of winning. Mr Kenyatta acknowledged
as much in his victory speech, saying that his re-election “is likely to be
subjected to a constitutional test through the courts”. His allies talk nervously
about a Kafkaesque situation where Kenya keeps holding elections that are
repeatedly rejected in court.

Yet most Kenyans have a more urgent worry. In the days after the second
election protesters fought against police in Mr Odinga’s strongholds in
western Kenya and Nairobi, the capital. Worse still, in parts of Nairobi

tension between Luos and Kikuyus spilled into street battles. In Kawangware,
a slum in the west of the city, shops and homes belonging to Kikuyus were
set on fire, apparently in retaliation for attacks by a Kikuyu militia. At least a
dozen people have died since October 26th. If the violence persists, Mr
Kenyatta’s victory could end up feeling very hollow, no matter what the
courts say.

This article was downloaded by calibre from https://www.economist.com/news/middle-
east-and-africa/21730894-presidents-landslide-re-election-marred-boycott-uhuru-
kenyattas-hollow/print

| Section menu | Main menu |

| Next | Section menu | Main menu | Previous |

Surviving under Mugabe

Zimbabwe’s deepening crisis

A ruined country is waiting for its elderly dictator to go

Nov 2nd 2017 | HARARE

A MONEY-CHANGER deftly flicks through a brick of bills, her fingernails
a sparkly purple that matches her eye-shadow. She keeps the stack of “bond
notes” (Zimbabwe’s ersatz money) bundled inside a sock in a plastic carrier
bag. Real American dollars are hidden in her bra. Although bond notes are
officially worth the same as American dollars, here on a pavement in Harare,
the capital, greenbacks trade at a premium of 20-30% to the bills printed by
Mr Mugabe’s government. Those wanting to buy dollar bills with mobile
money, which is also supposedly denominated in the American currency,
must pay a further premium of 30%.

Such a range of values for Zimbabwe’s money ought not to be possible since,
officially at least, it does not have a currency. The country adopted the
American dollar almost a decade ago after the central bank’s profligate
printing of Zimbabwe dollars led to hyperinflation that peaked at

500,000,000,000%. At the time, notes with a face value of 100trn Zimbabwe
dollars could barely pay for a loaf of bread.

Yet last year, when the government found it could no longer pay its bills
using real dollars, it started issuing bond notes, claiming they were
interchangeable. So insistent is it in this assertion that it has outlawed the
street trading of ersatz dollars for the real thing: money-changers can face a
decade behind bars if convicted. But this money-changer says that some of
her best customers are government officials who hoover up greenbacks to
spend or stash abroad. The value of real dollars spikes whenever Robert
Mugabe, who has ruled Zimbabwe since its independence in 1980, goes
abroad with his bloated entourage. “As long as there are bond notes, they will
never stop us hustlers,” says the money-changer. “They need us. We are the
people who are running the economy.”

After nearly two decades of lurching from one economic crisis to the next,
life in Zimbabwe somehow still grinds on. Mr Mugabe, old and frail, presides
over a fragile economy yet still controls his party, Zanu-PF. At 93, he is
running yet again for president, with an election planned for the first half of
next year. Though physically weak and forgetful (in 2015 he read the same
speech in parliament twice) he still plays factions of the party off against each
other to stay in control.

At a party conference in December he is expected to strengthen a faction
aligned with his wife, Grace, at the expense of Emmerson Mnangagwa, who
previously ran the security services and had been Mr Mugabe’s presumed
successor. Mr Mnangagwa, one of two vice-presidents, lost his post as justice
minister in a recent cabinet shuffle. “When you become a threat to the centre
of power, he disposes of you,” says Temba Mliswa, an independent member
of parliament and former Zanu-PF provincial chairman who is considered
close to Mr Mnangagwa. Mr Mugabe “is very old but he still understands
power”.

Most Zimbabweans think nothing will change until Mr Mugabe dies. In the
meantime they must scramble and adapt to survive. As many as 95% of
working people hustle for a living in the informal sector. On the streets one
finds professionals and graduates working as unlicensed traders. Sten
Zvorwadza, who leads a street-vendors’ union, reckons there are 100,000

such traders in Harare.

Some sell goods in the tiniest of quantities—a squeeze of toothpaste, a
teaspoon of sugar—because that is all many buyers can afford. Mr Mugabe
thinks hawkers make the city look dirty, and wants them moved to a dusty
patch in a depressed industrial area of Harare where there would be fewer
customers. Riot police known as “black boots” have used water cannons to
try to remove the hawkers. But they are fighting back. “Not a vendor by
choice,” says a sign posted in central Harare. “If not this, what?” says
another.

Everywhere you feel a sense of impending economic collapse. Many in the
country fret that hyperinflation will return, fuelled by the government’s
printing of electronic dollars. Since it cannot get real ones, and is running
large fiscal deficits (about 8% of GDP last year and probably more this year)
it has been issuing dollar-denominated treasury bills, or IOUs, to banks. The
banks in turn credit it with electronic dollars, which it uses to pay civil
servants, whose wages consume about 90% of government revenues. But that
money cannot be withdrawn.

The queues that once snaked around the block outside banks have
disappeared, but only because there is hardly any cash to be had. Nearly
everyone pays with swipe cards linked to Zimbabwean bank accounts, or
EcoCash, a popular form of mobile money. But the lack of foreign exchange
means that imports may become scarce. In late September a shiver of panic
over shortages of food and fuel rippled through the capital, sparking a round
of panic-buying. And prices are rising.

John Robertson, an economist, reckons that the money supply expanded by
36% in the 12 months to August, six times more than the rate a few years
earlier. “What’s behind that money? Nothing,” says Rob Davies, another
economist in Harare. “It’s a Ponzi scheme.”

In October Mr Mugabe replaced his pragmatic finance minister, Patrick
Chinamasa, with a loyalist. Mr Chinamasa lost his job while attending the
annual meetings of the World Bank and International Monetary Fund where
he was pleading for debt relief and new loans to restart the economy.
Zimbabwe is unlikely to get either as long as Mr Mugabe is in charge.

This article was downloaded by calibre from https://www.economist.com/news/middle-
east-and-africa/21730913-ruined-country-waiting-its-elderly-dictator-go-zimbabwes-
deepening/print

| Section menu | Main menu |

| Next section | Main menu | Previous section |

Europe

Catalonia: The man who wasn’t there [Thu, 02 Nov 23:23]
Russia: The ride of the mercenaries [Thu, 02 Nov 23:23]
France’s croissant crisis: Sacré beurre [Thu, 02 Nov 23:23]
Charlemagne: The ghost at the banquet [Thu, 02 Nov 23:23]

| Next section | Main menu | Previous section |

| Next | Section menu | Main menu |

Catalonia

The man who wasn’t there

Government intervention and a snap election have defused, but not settled, a
crisis that goes to the essence of Spanish democracy

Nov 2nd 2017 | BARCELONA AND MADRID

ON THE morning of October 30th five police vans staked out the Palace of
the Generalitat, the part-medieval seat of the government of Catalonia on the
Plaça Sant Jaume in Barcelona’s gothic quarter. But there was no sign of
Carles Puigdemont, Catalonia’s now ex-president, nor of any demonstrators
protesting against his dismissal by the Spanish government. Instead, there
were foreign journalists waiting for the clash that didn’t happen.

Three days earlier, Plaça Sant Jaume overflowed with a euphoric crowd
celebrating a declaration of independence by the Catalan parliament.
“Freedom”, they chanted. “It’s a dream, it’s marvellous,” said David Regalos,
an estate agent who had brought his teenage daughter for what he saw as a
historic occasion. “It may hurt the business I work in,” he admitted, “but I’m
thinking of the future of my children.”

But as dusk fell with an autumnal chill, the dream was revealed to be
delirium. Even as the crowd caroused, in Madrid Mariano Rajoy, Spain’s
prime minister, announced that the government was taking direct charge of
Catalonia, using extraordinary powers under Article 155 of the constitution of
1978. The move was approved by Spain’s Senate minutes after the vote in the
Catalan parliament. The government swiftly sacked Mr Puigdemont and his
government, and replaced the commander of the Catalan police. And, to the
surprise of many, Mr Rajoy called a regional election in Catalonia for
December 21st.

By abbreviating direct rule to the minimum, he removed much of its sting.
Mr Puigdemont called for “democratic opposition”, but he opted not to
organise resistance on the streets of Barcelona. Instead, he fled to Brussels.
Spain’s National Court is to investigate him and his colleagues over charges
of rebellion, which carries a sentence of up to 30 years. Summonsed to
appear on November 2nd, he said he would stay in Belgium until he receives
guarantees of a “fair trial”.

Enabling Catalans to vote swiftly may help to release the tension that
accumulated in the region before and after the unauthorised referendum on
independence held on October 1st by the Generalitat. But it cannot hide the
gravity of Spain’s underlying constitutional crisis. Article 155, which is an
almost exact copy of a provision in the German constitution, has never before
had to be invoked.

“This is a momentous decision,” said a senior official in past Socialist
governments. “It supposes the breakdown of the constitution’s territorial
model” under which Spain decentralised many powers and revenues to 17
self-governing “autonomous communities”. The constitution, which ushered
in democracy after Franco’s long dictatorship (and was approved
overwhelmingly by Catalans), has given Spain the best years of its modern
history. Since 1978 the country’s income per person has doubled in real terms
while regional inequalities have narrowed. Spain has built an advanced
democracy, created a welfare state and cast off its past isolation to join the
European Union. Although the slump that followed the bursting of a housing
bubble in 2008 inflicted much hardship, Spain avoided social conflict.

The aftermath of austerity eroded but did not break the two-party system, in

which the Socialists and Mr Rajoy’s conservative People’s Party (PP) have
alternated in government. Despite the emergence of Podemos, a populist far-
left party, Mr Rajoy, who governed alone in 2011-15, managed to form a
minority administration last year with the support of Ciudadanos, a new
centre-right party. But having held Podemos at bay, Mr Rajoy has found that
populism in Catalonia poses an even bigger problem, notes a former minister.

In the land of make-believe

Mr Puigdemont called the application of Article 155 “the worst attack on the
institutions of Catalan self-government” since Franco. His critics say he
precipitated it, starting with laws his parliament approved in September to
call the referendum and begin the transition to an independent state. As well
as violating the Spanish constitution, these implicitly abolished the Catalan
autonomy statute. The government was not “suspending autonomy but…
returning Catalonia to self-government and legality as soon as possible,”
declared Mr Rajoy.

According to the Generalitat, 43% voted in the referendum (90% of them
Yes), though the numbers cannot be verified. Buoyed by a wave of
international sympathy, which was brought about by the government’s
disastrous deployment of riot police who tried and failed to stop the vote, Mr
Puigdemont took the result as a mandate for a unilateral declaration of
independence. That prospect has prompted more than 1,800 companies to
move their legal domicile out of Catalonia since October 1st. Tourist
bookings and consumer confidence have both fallen. Alarmed, moderate
nationalists pressed Mr Puigdemont to draw back. On October 26th he was
poised to do so by calling a fresh regional election himself, which would
have stalled Article 155.

But faced with accusations of treachery from hardline nationalists, he instead
pushed the Catalan parliament to pass a resolution “constituting the Catalan
republic as an independent and sovereign state”. Approved by 70 votes out of
135 (the opposition walked out), it was a hollow declaration. No country
recognised it. Privately, officials of the Catalan government admitted they
were completely unprepared for statehood. Evidently, they were also
unprepared for the consequences of declaring independence.

Things fall apart

So why did it happen? Mr Puigdemont, an affable former journalist and
mayor of Girona, blamed the government’s refusal to talk. Mr Rajoy’s riposte
was that Mr Puigdemont only ever wanted to talk about holding a
referendum, although the constitution, in line with the continental European
norm, does not recognise a right of self-determination for regions.

In the end Mr Puigdemont was as much the prisoner as the leader of the
grass-roots independence movement the Catalan government has promoted.
After the referendum, separatists were further inflamed by the jailing,
pending trial for obstructing a police raid, of the leaders of two secessionist
social movements. They formed part of what in Barcelona was called “the
general staff of the independence process”, seeming to co-govern with Mr
Puigdemont.

While the government underestimated the strength of the independence
movement, its leaders overestimated it. Josep Borell, a Catalan former
Socialist minister and opponent of independence, says that he has “lifelong
friends with whom I can no longer talk”. Some bookshops in small-town
Catalonia now refuse to stock his best-selling book questioning the
secessionists’ arguments. In this conflict, propaganda is the key weapon, he
adds, and “they use it very well and the government and unionist groups very
badly.”

However, the Generalitat fell into the trap of believing its own propaganda.
First, it denied that companies would leave, and then minimised their
departure, saying they would return. “That is not so easy,” says a Catalan
business leader, citing the parallel with Quebec. Montreal never recovered its
position as Canada’s leading business centre after the secessionist scare in the
1980s and 1990s. That may be Barcelona’s fate: companies will gradually
transfer head-office functions and jobs, predicts Antón Costas, an economist
at the University of Barcelona.

Second, Catalan officials always thought that the EU would embrace their
cause, although there was no reason to believe that. They failed to appreciate
that outsiders were left open-mouthed by their comparison of Catalonia’s
plight within Spain to Lithuania’s liberation from the Soviet Union or

Kosovo’s from Serbia.

Third, they seemed to believe their populist claim to speak for “the Catalan
people”. No sooner had they stated that 2.3m people voted on October 1st
than they started claiming that police had “stolen 700,000 votes”, for which
there is not a scrap of evidence. After the independence vote in the
parliament, Mr Puigdemont declared that “the immense majority” of
Catalonia’s political representatives “have fulfilled a mandate validated by
the ballot box”. The reality is that independence has never commanded a
majority, despite a post-referendum spike in a poll this week (see chart 1).
The ruling coalition won only 48% of the vote in the 2015 regional election;
it had a bare majority of seats in the dissolved parliament only because of the
over-representation of the region’s interior. Catalonia is more divided and
angrily polarised than at any time since 1978. The better-off, and those in
smaller towns or with Catalan-speaking parents, favour independence; poorer
Catalans, and those living in greater Barcelona or immigrants from the rest of
Spain do not.

Plaça Sant Jaume has seen it all before. In the 1930s the Second Republic
granted self-government to Catalonia. Yet on October 6th 1934—two years
before Franco started the civil war—Lluís Companys, the Catalan president,
appeared on the balcony of the Generalitat to declare a “Catalan state”. It
lasted just ten hours. “Even if we lose,” Companys had said, “Catalonia will
win because we need martyrs who will tomorrow assure definitive victory.”

It is easy to see a parallel in Mr Puigdemont’s conduct. By the same token, he
sees himself as the inheritor of a long tradition. He styles himself “the 130th

president of the Generalitat”. But if nations are “imagined communities”, as
Benedict Anderson, a historian, wrote, Catalonia is more imagined than most.

“Before the 20th century, there was no nation called Catalonia,” writes Jordi
Canal, a Catalan historian. The Generalitat began as a feudal institution in the
Frankish County of Barcelona. This was absorbed first into the Crown of
Aragon and then that of Spain. The region’s emergence as the industrial
powerhouse of Spain brought social upheaval and immigration—and a
cultural renaissance centred on the revival of the Catalan language, which in
turn spawned a nationalist movement among the powerful Catalan
bourgeoisie. According to Mr Canal “It was the nationalists who, from the
late 1890s, set out to build a nation and to nationalise Catalans.” Something
similar happened in the Basque Country and to a lesser extent Galicia, which
each have their own language.

These regional exceptionalisms challenged a weak Spanish state, whose
impulse was to centralise. In the parliamentary debate on the Catalan statute
of 1932, José Ortega y Gasset, Spain’s foremost 20th-century philosopher,
argued that Catalonia was a “perpetual” problem that “cannot be settled, it
can only be lived with”. Manuel Azaña, the prime minister (later president) of
the Republic, replied that Spain should positively embrace its regional
diversity as part of its “spiritual wealth”, recognised in self-government.

That was the spirit, too, of the 1978 constitution, albeit flawed by the dilution
of regional exceptionalism with decentralisation for the whole country.
Nevertheless, the constitution was approved by 91% of voters in Catalonia on
a 68% turnout. For years, it satisfied the nationalists. But then several things

came together to ignite the drive for independence.

The first was an ill-fated attempt in 2006 by a Socialist-led regional
government to reform the Catalan statute, giving the Generalitat more powers
(over the courts, for example) and in tortuous phrasing recognising Catalonia
as a nation. “The whole process was unfortunate,” says the Socialist former
official, who was involved in it. “Nobody had demanded a new statute, the
negotiation was very chaotic and they came up with a jigsaw puzzle that
didn’t fit.” Approved by 73% in a referendum (with a 49% turnout) in
Catalonia, the 2006 statute was then partially rejected by the Constitutional
Tribunal in 2010. That turned it into a casus belli.

The tribunal’s ruling coincided with the onset of the economic slump. Artur
Mas, the nationalist president of the Generalitat, at first had no compunction
about applying austerity. In June 2011 several thousand indignados
surrounded the Catalan parliament to protest against his budget cuts. That
prompted him to demand fiscal concessions from Mr Rajoy, just when Spain
was on the brink of having to seek a European bail-out. Rebuffed, he
launched the drive for an independence referendum.

Umbrage in Catalonia

Another red rag to Catalan nationalism was the PP. It had campaigned against
the new statute. Many Catalans see the party as the embodiment of Castilian
centralism, and feel marginalised by its drive to aggrandise Madrid. The
Spanish state has failed to base any important institutions in Barcelona, for
example. Many PP politicians in turn blame the rise of secessionism on what
they see as the disloyal abuse of self-government by the Generalitat
systematically to build a nation. This has had “very effective levers” in “the
education system, the public and subsidised private media, and the gradual
acceptance of the disappearance of the symbols of the state and of Spain in
Catalonia”, Josep Piqué, a Catalan former PP minister, told El País, a Madrid
newspaper.

Mr Puigdemont’s flight to Brussels marks the end of what Catalans call the
procés, the drive for an independence referendum. “Now the movement will
concentrate on defending its leaders,” says Andreu Mas-Colell, the economic
councillor in Mr Mas’s government. Even if the separatist coalition stays
together and wins the election, after the October debacle it is unlikely to do
so on a platform that gives priority to independence.

Must Spain “live with” an unresolvable Catalan problem? On paper, it is not
hard to sketch a new solution: Catalans would probably settle for a bit more
money, guarantees for the Catalan language and symbolic recognition of
Catalonia as a nation. Another approach would be federalism, which would
clarify responsibilities. Since change to the constitution and Catalonia’s
statute requires a referendum, it could offer the vote the nationalists want.

But is any of this politically doable? In return for Socialist support over
Article 155 Mr Rajoy agreed to a congressional committee to discuss
constitutional reform. Mr Mas-Colell is sceptical that it will produce anything
useful. In the past two months, Catalan nationalism has awakened its dormant
Spanish counterpart. Many Spaniards see Catalans as tight-fisted whingers.
Supporters of the PP and of Ciudadanos, formed to oppose Catalan
nationalism, want to roll back decentralisation.

The underlying task is the restoration of mutual trust between Catalonia and
the rest of the country. “This is an emotional problem, and the solution has to
be emotional,” says Javier Vega de Seaone of the Circulo de Empresarios, a
business group.

The Catalan crisis is merely the most dramatic sign that Spain’s constitution
needs updating. Decentralisation across the country has added complexity
and thrown up regulatory barriers. And Spain’s entry into the EU in 1986
removed powers from the central government. “The important thing is that
constitutional reform doesn’t become a price to be paid but rather is a shared
project,” says José Maria de Areilza, a law professor at ESADE, a business
school.

The transition to democracy generated a sense of purpose in Spain that has
recently been missing, despite the country’s vigorous economic recovery.
Spain’s leaders now have a choice. They can let the Catalan problem fester,
or they can use it as the spur for national renewal.

This article was downloaded by calibre from
https://www.economist.com/news/europe/21730874-government-intervention-and-snap-
election-have-defused-not-settled-crisis-goes/print

| Section menu | Main menu |

| Next | Section menu | Main menu | Previous |

The ride of the mercenaries

How “Wagner” came to Syria

Captured soldiers cast light on the work of a shadowy group

Nov 2nd 2017 | MOSCOW

“I AM Roman Sergeyevich Zabolotny, born in 1979, and I have been taken
prisoner,” says a Russian-speaking man in a video released last month by the
jihadists of Islamic State (IS). A second soldier, his right eye swollen shut,
sits silently in grey robes. Both were reportedly captured during a battle near
Deir ez-Zor, a city in Syria’s east and the site of a recent offensive by Russian
and Syrian government forces. Yet the Russian defence ministry denied that
any of its soldiers had gone missing. Friends and relatives told Russian media
that the men had gone to Syria not with the Russian army, but as part of a
shadowy mercenary force known as “Wagner”.

The group has come to play a key role in Russian operations in Syria. Though
Russian law officially bans private military companies (PMCs), a St
Petersburg-based independent news site, Fontanka.ru, reported in late 2015
that ex-soldiers were being recruited to serve in Wagner by a former special-

forces officer, Dmitry Utkin. Numbering as many as 2,500 men, the group is
believed to have figured heavily in operations around Palmyra in 2016,
serving as “shock troops” alongside the Syrian army, says Mark Galeotti, an
expert on Russian security at the Institute of International Relations in
Prague. Though the Russian army has not acknowledged Wagner’s existence,
Mr Utkin was photographed late last year alongside President Vladimir Putin
at a Kremlin reception for military officers in honour of Day of Heroes of the
Fatherland. This summer America added him to its list of officials sanctioned
for involvement in the Ukraine conflict of 2014, where the group is said to
have got its start.

When Russia launched its intervention in Syria in September 2015, the
government spoke of a short air operation. Boots on the ground were seen as
taboo, especially to a population still haunted by memories of the costly
Soviet war in Afghanistan. (Nearly half the population would now like to see
the Syrian operation wrapped up.) But having a nominally independent cadre
of fighters to deploy as ground forces gives the Russian army plausible
deniability. “They serve to solve a concrete problem: have no casualties,”
says Alexander Golts, a military analyst. Officially Russia’s armed forces
have in fact reported some 41 deaths in Syria, including a general killed in
shelling near Deir ez-Zor in September while commanding Syria’s Fifth
Corps of volunteers. However, investigative journalists and bloggers reckon
scores more Wagner-linked mercenaries have died in combat. On the ground,
the force functions as a “pseudo-private” military company, taking direction
from the Russian army, says Alexander Khramchikhin, deputy director of the
Institute for Political and Military Analysis.

The model was first tested in the war in eastern Ukraine, where a patchwork
of forces operated with differing degrees of distance from the Russian
government. Alongside local separatists and regular Russian army units were
groups of Russian volunteers and mercenaries, among them Mr Utkin and an
early iteration of the Wagner force. “The rumours are that they fought, and
fought well,” says one former senior separatist commander, with a sly smile.
As fighting slowed in 2015, mercenaries and volunteers returned home or
sought employment elsewhere. It is no secret that many of them have since
left for Syria, says another former separatist leader.

The emergence of such groups revived talk in Russia of legalising Russian
PMCs to create companies in the vein of American security contractors such
as Academi (formerly called Blackwater). Mr Putin expressed tentative
support for that idea back in 2011, calling it “a way of implementing national
interests without the direct involvement of the state”. In late 2014 Gennady
Nosovko, a lawmaker with the Just Russia party, submitted a bill that would
have laid the legal groundwork, only to see Russia’s powerful Security
Council snuff it out. Resistance was also strong from within the military and
security services, which worried about losing their monopoly of violence.
Other specialists, Mr Nosovko says, worried that powerful businessmen
would ultimately seek to control their own private armies, with dreadful
implications.

For now, the Wagnerians still operate in a grey zone. Fontanka.ru recently
reported that their role has expanded to include seizing oil wells held by IS
for a newly-formed Russian company, Evro Polis. As for the two captives,
their fates are probably sealed, says an MP from the home region of one of
them. “There’s a 99% chance that Roman and the second prisoner are no
longer among the living.”

This article was downloaded by calibre from
https://www.economist.com/news/europe/21730873-captured-soldiers-cast-light-work-
shadowy-group-how-wagner-came-syria/print

| Section menu | Main menu |

| Next | Section menu | Main menu | Previous |

Sacré beurre

The French are fretting over a sudden butter shortage

But forget about making croissants with margarine

Nov 2nd 2017 | PARIS

“IT’S A true catastrophe, monsieur,” says a baker in central Paris as she
places warm, flaky croissants in a paper bag. The price of local butter has
soared in the past year, she says: “We are used to costs going up, but this is
really extreme.” Her pastry counter is well stocked, but margins per croissant
are squeezed.

Elsewhere it is shortages that bite. In a nearby Carrefour supermarket, fridges
that are usually crammed with packets of butter are mostly empty. Social-
media users around France share photos of bare shelves using the tag
#BeurreGate. A prankster on an online-auction site offered to sell a slice of
buttered toast. Press reports talk of hoarding. Because butter is essential for
much local cuisine—the French eat more of it than anyone—scarcity spreads
dismay.

Various factors explain the current churn. Global appetite for dairy products
is rising. “China has discovered croissants,” notes Emmanuelle Auriole of the
Toulouse School of Economics. Westerners fret that sugar is unhealthy but
are relearning the joys of full-cream milk, cheese and butter. A global dairy-
price index of the Food and Agriculture Organisation is up by 27% in a year.
In Europe butter recently sold on wholesale markets for a record €6,500
($7,600) a tonne, says Bloomberg. Yet suppliers have responded slowly.
Subsidy reforms and the end of production quotas for dairy farmers in 2015
led to the melting away of Europe’s butter mountain. Bad weather and earlier
price fluctuations made it harder for producers to plan.

These changes are global, yet France alone suffers empty supermarket
shelves. Blame that on rigid local conditions, notably a lack of competition
among big retailers who refused to pay more for the product. A handful of
these have monopsonistic power, negotiating with suppliers only once a year,
in February; regulatory barriers keep challengers out. No wonder French
producers now prefer to sell to Germany, where butter prices in supermarkets
rose by 72% in the year to August, rather than France where they rose by just
6%, according to one industry worker.

As for the baker, if supplies become too pricey, could there be alternatives?
Might she even try to bake with—whisper it—margarine? Fat chance. “We
use French butter or nothing,” she admonishes, wagging a finger.

This article was downloaded by calibre from
https://www.economist.com/news/europe/21730877-forget-about-making-croissants-
margarine-french-are-fretting-over-sudden-butter/print

| Section menu | Main menu |

| Next | Section menu | Main menu | Previous |

Charlemagne: The ghost at the banquet

Britain’s planned departure is already changing Brussels

Free-traders and Atlanticists have much to mourn

Nov 2nd 2017

SCRATCH your head and the memory flickers into life. Britain was once an
influential member of the European Union. Its politicians were infuriating but
effective, its diplomats skilled at crafting alliances, its officials adept at the
push-me-pull-you of shaping EU law. This is how Britain earned a budget
rebate, an opt-out from the euro, and, under David Cameron, a
“renegotiation” of its membership (since voided by the Brexit vote). Nor
were its energies devoted solely to carving out special treatment. Vital EU
achievements like the single market and post-1989 enlargement owe their
existence to dogged British diplomacy.

How things change. British officials describe a chill that set in the moment
voters elected to leave. Ostensibly Britain remains fully signed up to the EU,
with voting rights, representation and all the paraphernalia of membership. In
reality, its influence has largely evaporated. That has a potent effect on the

remaining 27 members. “The balance of power is changing every day,” says
a diplomat from a country friendly to Britain. “You can feel it.” Almost 18
months before Britain is due to leave, Brexit is changing the EU in a way that
unsettles some, inspires others and affects all.

Few countries wanted Britain to leave, but for some the stakes are especially
high. Assembling compromises inside the EU is a delicate dance often
dominated by the positions of a few big beasts. Like-minded countries were
delighted to rally behind the British on matters like trade, regulation and the
single market. Smaller governments often appreciated Britain blocking
Franco-German stitch-ups. Now few care to hear the views of a country that
has one foot out of the door, and few British officials seek the opprobrium
they would attract if they offered them.

Take trade, where fresh fault-lines are emerging. Countries like the
Netherlands, Denmark and even Spain are casting a suspicious eye on
Emmanuel Macron, France’s president, whose calls for a “Europe that
protects” are starting to sound a little like protectionism. At a recent summit
Mark Rutte, the Dutch prime minister, questioned Mr Macron’s attempts to
slow down EU trade talks with Mercosur, a Latin American bloc; in the past,
say Dutch officials, they might have left it to Britain to take on the French.
On the increasingly modish topic of “trade remedies” (anti-dumping
measures, investment screening and so on), the absence of a sceptical British
voice also tilts the scales against the free-traders.

Low-tax economies like Ireland and Luxembourg fear a fresh Franco-German
assault on their fiscal independence, another issue on which they could once
rely on stout British resistance. The European Commission has already
announced that it wants to remove governments’ rights to veto EU tax
proposals. On foreign policy, the EU’s carefully co-ordinated sanctions on
Russia over its incursions in Ukraine may have been shepherded by Angela
Merkel but were energised by a group of hardliners led by Britain. The
measures must be rolled over every six months; Britain’s departure could
hasten their eventual end. Fellow Russia hawks, like the Baltic states, worry
about what Brexit will mean for the EU’s ability to stand up to bullies.

But others spot opportunities created by the departure of the irascible Brits.
Grand federalist schemes, such as replacing the British contingent of

European parliamentarians with transnational lists presented to all EU voters,
will go nowhere (for now). But Brexit has also inspired those who never
liked the model of endless exceptionalism pioneered by Britain but welcomed
by many others. On the single currency, for example, Britain’s presence once
served as a reassuring reminder to countries outside the euro zone that they
could not be sidelined. Now the commission is quietly reminding euro “outs”
that most of them have a legal obligation to join.

Yet Britain’s departure also forces some tricky questions on the rest of the
EU. British governments used to veto anything that even sniffed of defence
co-operation inside the EU, for example, claiming it would undermine
NATO. Now it is back on the table: Mr Macron wants other countries to
share France’s military burdens in the Sahel and the commission wants a
bigger common defence fund. Brexit calls the bluff of leaders who said
discussing such issues was useless while Britain was in the room. The loss of
one of the two members, along with France, with genuine military clout
should also trigger concern over the EU slipping into geopolitical irrelevance.
But are Europe’s defence shirkers really prepared to pull their weight now
that Britain is on the way out? A summit in December will test the water.

Future imperfect

It is harder still to predict the long-term implications of Brexit for the EU.
Immediately after last year’s referendum some of the more gung-ho
Brexiteers argued that the example of Britain’s departure would inspire
floods of imitators. A series of electoral setbacks for anti-Europeans over the
past year has killed off that idea for now. Perhaps these prophecies will
eventually be fulfilled if Britain manages to make a success of life outside the
club, although the chaotic process of Brexit seems to have given the EU’s
popularity a bump everywhere else. A more plausible outcome, gently
entertained by Mr Macron, is that over time the EU adopts a more flexible
model of membership, reassembling itself into “tiers” that allow countries to
choose the level of integration to which they are best suited.

Such notions, notes a disinterested British official, run up against the
centripetal forces that drive many EU countries to remain as close to the core
as possible. At present it suits everyone in Europe to treat Brexit as a sui
generis case from which no broader lessons can be drawn. Perhaps that is

right. But it should not preclude creative ideas that can accommodate a
variety of preferences, including an outer tier for laggards, stragglers and
those countries that simply seek a looser relationship with the EU. Perhaps it
might even one day find room for Britain.

This article was downloaded by calibre from
https://www.economist.com/news/europe/21730878-free-traders-and-atlanticists-have-
much-mourn-britains-planned-departure-already-changing/print

| Section menu | Main menu |

| Next section | Main menu | Previous section |

Britain

[Thu, 02 Nov 23:23]

The National Health Service: Policy transplant [Thu, 02 Nov 23:23]
Political funding: Following the money [Thu, 02 Nov 23:23]
Business and politics: Brexiteer rock, Marxist hard place
Housing in London: Letting out some air [Thu, 02 Nov 23:23]
Britain and Spain: Tu casa es mi casa [Thu, 02 Nov 23:23]
Higher education: Everyone v gown [Thu, 02 Nov 23:23]
Bagehot: The Palace of Pestminster [Thu, 02 Nov 23:23]

| Next section | Main menu | Previous section |

| Next | Section menu | Main menu |

Policy transplant

Is this the end of the NHS’s internal market?

Three decades of market-based reforms are being rethought

Nov 2nd 2017 | MILLOM

CLAIRE MORRIS used to work as an ambulance paramedic in Lancaster, in
north-west England. But as part of recent changes in the National Health
Service, last year she moved 50 miles away to Millom, a town of 8,500
people that has struggled since the closure of its ironworks half a century ago.
There she became part of a new system that continues to handle 999 calls, but
now also liaises with other health workers to ensure vulnerable residents
receive good enough care that they do not have to call the emergency services
in the first place.

Such an approach may seem like common sense, but it is far from the norm.
Despite its name, the NHS it not a single service. It is a mish-mash that
involves nearly 7,500 general practices (clinics of GPs, or family doctors,
which are independent contractors); 233 “trusts”, as hospitals and other direct
providers of care are known; and some 850 companies and charities that

provide care on behalf of the NHS. All of these entities have their own
contracts, budgets, employees and incentives. None is responsible for social
care, the residential support for elderly or disabled folk that is mostly left to
local authorities.

The project in Millom and its surrounding area of Morecambe Bay is one of
50 experimental “vanguard” sites set up by the NHS in England to piece
together this fragmented system, which is increasingly struggling to cope
with growing numbers of elderly people with multiple chronic conditions.
Although the scope of each vanguard varies, all aim to break down silos by
combining budgets and having staff from different parts of the health service
work more closely together. Simon Stevens, head of NHS England, wants
these sites to be models for the rest of the service.

At last, almost unnoticed, the NHS is starting to change at its core. It is a shift
that indicates the end of an era of thinking about health care. In 1990 Ken
Clarke, then Conservative health secretary, created an “internal market” by
separating the parts of the NHS that pay for services from those that provide
them. From 1997 Labour added a vast set of targets and a tariff for each
procedure, to reward the most active hospitals. The Tory-led coalition of
2010-15 devolved more of the NHS budget to local groups of clinicians;
today two-thirds of its spending is done via 207 “clinical commissioning
groups”, which buy services from trusts and other providers.

Vanguards deliberately undermine this history. In February Mr Stevens told
MPs that the reforms would “effectively end the purchaser-provider split,”
adding for those parliamentarians unfamiliar with NHS-speak: “This is pretty
big stuff.”

In Millom the stuff seems to be working. Between 2014 and 2016 the town
reduced emergency admissions to hospital by 23% and elective admissions
by 16%. Emergency admissions from care homes were cut by 10%. Between
April 2015 and December 2016, the whole Morecambe Bay region saw small
drops in emergency hospital admissions and occupancy rates, even as most of
the country saw increases.

Those running the vanguard ascribe the results to co-operation. The NHS is
“a bit like ‘Game of Thrones’,” says John Howarth, one of the vanguard’s

clinical leaders. “We’re a set of tribes who are often at war…We need to
rejoin the tribes into one NHS tribe.” Millom’s one GP practice is in the same
building as the community hospital and the ambulance service but, until Ms
Morris started there, they barely spoke and never shared data. Now they are
in constant touch, with workers going through phone logs to identify
pensioners who call 999 because they do not know what else to do, then
liaising across the services to work out how best to care for them at home.

Morecambe and wise

GPs in Millom can now phone or videolink with specialists at regional
hospitals. Though this takes a specialist’s time (which under the usual NHS
model means the hospital billing for a consultation fee under the NHS tariff),
it can save more time and money later. In Morecambe Bay, this change
avoided 1,400 unnecessary outpatient referrals in the 11 months to February
2017—no small achievement, since a bus journey from Millom to Lancaster
can take more than two hours.

A scheme allowing people with minor eye conditions to see a local
optometrist avoided 1,600 unnecessary referrals in its first 18 weeks. Some
GP practices are hiring nurses and paramedics to screen patients who need
not see a doctor. Other vanguards have GPs in their emergency departments
to filter those who do not need urgent treatment. Morecambe runs weekly
drop-in “café” clinics: the Airways Café for respiratory diseases; the Serenity
Café for mental-health problems; and the self-explanatory Leg Ulcer Café
(Professor Howarth concedes it may need a new name).

Before the general election in June was announced, Mr Stevens updated his
five-year blueprint for the NHS. He announced that the models of care in the
vanguard areas would be imitated throughout the system, via 44 similar local
agreements known as Sustainability and Transformation Plans (STPs). A
pioneering eight areas will go further still, becoming what he termed
Accountable Care Systems (ACSs). These bodies are based on Accountable
Care Organisations, an increasingly common way of organising care in
America, where most involve one or more health-care providers signing a
contract with a health-care payer (such as Medicare, the public scheme for
retirees) to deliver specific health outcomes for a defined population over a
number of years. ACSs are ersatz versions of this model. They largely

formalise what the vanguards are already doing: joining providers in one area
together, with the aim of coming under one integrated budget which pays
hospitals and clinics for how healthy they keep people, not how many
procedures they carry out.

“This is a complete reversal of the Health and Social Care Act of 2012 and
the reforms under Andrew Lansley [the health secretary in 2010-12],” says
Ben Collins of the King’s Fund, a think-tank. If the experiment were
expanded, he says, it could in effect lead to the end of the internal market,
since it blurs the line between provider and buyer. “We are finally building a
model of care based on the actual needs of the population,” says Ranjit Gill,
clinical leader of a vanguard in Stockport.

Vanguards and STPs are “workarounds”, in the words of one doctor. Though
he supports them, Andrew Haldenby of Reform, another think-tank, says that
STPs have “mad geography, no executive authority and inconsistent vision”.
To change this would require new legislation, which is beyond the paralysed
government. So the NHS is pushing on, trying to prove the plans’ worth
before any legal changes are required. It is betting that the benefits of
integration will exceed the costs of eroding the internal market.

Will they? True, the current system wastes millions of pounds on an
unwieldy commissioning process. And fragmentation is an incentive for
employees to optimise their own performance with little thought for the rest
of the system. Nevertheless, the imperfect market-based reforms of the past
30 years have helped to cut waiting times, give patients more choice and
instil financial discipline.

Three challenges face the NHS as it makes the case for change. The first is
that although integration may help patients, it does not always mean savings
for the system, since the overall budget is predetermined. Reducing hospital
occupancy rates from 95% to 93% is great, says Professor Howarth, but it
does not save money. The second, articulated by many doctors, is that the
reforms will not be given time to work. The Labour Party is sceptical of
STPs, which it sees as vehicles for cutting spending. It wants to halt the plans
and give local areas more money before asking them to figure out how to
proceed.

The final issue, says Mr Collins of the King’s Fund, is accountability. “The
whole reason the purchaser-provider split was introduced was because of
unaccountable local monopolies,” he notes. Although the internal market
brought only imperfect accountability, what if the new models fail to deliver
improvement? “We could find ourselves back in the 1970s,” he warns.

This article was downloaded by calibre from
https://www.economist.com/news/britain/21730887-three-decades-market-based-reforms-
are-being-rethought-end-nhss-internal/print

| Section menu | Main menu |

| Next | Section menu | Main menu | Previous |

Following the money

Arron Banks, bankroller of Brexit, faces investigation over his donations

Claims of Russian influence are “complete bollocks”, he insists

Nov 2nd 2017

ARRON BANKS, the biggest financial backer of last year’s Brexit
campaign, sounded unbothered when news broke on November 1st that the
Electoral Commission had launched an investigation into his donations.
“Gosh I’m terrified,” he tweeted.

The probe concerns Better for the Country Ltd, which doled out £2.4m
($3.2m) to organisations that campaigned for Brexit. The Electoral
Commission, which regulates political spending, will examine whether the
company, of which Mr Banks was a director, was the “true source” of these
donations. At the heart of the investigation is the question of whether these
donations in fact came from outside Britain, in breach of the law.

Recipients of the money—which included the UK Independence Party and
Grassroots Out, an organisation set up by a Conservative MP—will also be

investigated, to see if they carried out appropriate checks on the donations.
Although the Electoral Commission is empowered to hand out only puny
fines of up to £20,000 per breach, it can pass on information to the police if it
comes across criminal behaviour. Bob Posner, who is leading the
investigation, justified it by arguing that persistent questions over funding in
the referendum risked harming “voters’ confidence”.

The move was seized on by MPs who have campaigned for a closer look at
how the Leave campaign was financed. “At last!” proclaimed Ben Bradshaw,
a Labour MP, who linked the investigation with efforts by American
congressmen to examine Russian interference in last year’s presidential
election.

Mr Banks dismissed the idea of a link between Russia and Brexit as
“complete bollocks”. The only interaction he has had with the Russians was a
“boozy six-hour lunch with the ambassador where we drank the place dry”,
he wrote. Mr Banks added that the brandy and vodka provided was
“cracking” and that he had already written about the encounter in his book,
“The Bad Boys of Brexit”.

Mr Banks set up Leave.EU, which campaigned for Brexit in parallel with the
official Vote Leave campaign. Leave.EU benefited from £6m in loans from
Mr Banks, making him the biggest individual backer of Brexit. This
generosity was made possible by a personal fortune—built up via
investments in banking, insurance and a diamond mine, among other interests
—which has been estimated at £250m. Yet some, including Mr Bradshaw,
have suggested that Mr Banks’s true net worth may be much lower.
Leave.EU’s funding is also being examined by the Electoral Commission as
part of a second probe.

Since the referendum, Mr Banks has entertained himself by toying with the
idea of setting up a new populist party. For now, the Russia allegations seem
not to have perturbed him much. He signed off his statement with a single
word: “Nostrovia” (“Cheers”).

This article was downloaded by calibre from
https://www.economist.com/news/britain/21730890-claims-russian-influence-are-complete-
bollocks-he-insists-arron-banks-bankroller-brexit/print

| Section menu | Main menu |

| Next | Section menu | Main menu | Previous |

British business and politics

Time for some hostile-environment training

It is a choice between Brexiteers or Marxists for beleaguered businesspeople

Nov 2nd 2017

WHEN Jeremy Corbyn addressed the Confederation of British Industry
(CBI) last year at its annual jamboree, he was listened to politely, but
perfunctorily. When the leader of the opposition gets up to do the same next
week, however, Britain’s most important business lobby group will hang on
his every word. Last year Mr Corbyn seemed barely in control of his own
party, let alone the country. Now, after humiliating Theresa May’s
government in the general election on June 8th, he could well be the next
prime minister. Businesses have to take him seriously, whatever they think of
his hard-left politics.

The ascent of Mr Corbyn strengthens the political headwinds that have been
blowing bosses’ way. Since the vote for Brexit and the rise of Mrs May last
year, relations with the Tories, normally dependable allies, have been
strained. Lord Bilimoria, chairman of Cobra Beer and a cross-bench peer,

says that firms are caught “between a rock and a hard place”. Others refer to
the early 1980s, when Michael Foot was leader of the Labour Party and the
CBI was promising a “bare-knuckle fight” with Margaret Thatcher over
monetary policy. But business folk are a pragmatic bunch, and a lot of effort
is going into getting a better hearing in Westminster. To a degree, also,
business is changing to achieve that.

Faced with the alternative of a Corbyn government, lots of company
donations flowed to the Conservatives ahead of the election in June (see
chart). But this masks unusual tensions with the party, and not only over the
possibility of a no-deal Brexit, the doomsday scenario for many
businesspeople. Mrs May has also attacked how business operates, from
suggesting that workers should sit on boards to imposing price caps on
energy firms. Rarely has the party seemed less friendly towards enterprise
and the free-market.

At least the atmosphere has improved since June. Before then, business
complained loudly about a lack of access to government, and to Downing
Street in particular. Since the departure of Mrs May’s two gatekeepers, Nick
Timothy and Fiona Hill, her engagement with the main business groups has
stepped up. A new business advisory group meets regularly with senior
ministers. Mrs May meets a separate business council with a more ad hoc
membership. Stephen Martin, head of the Institute of Directors, which
represents small and medium-sized firms, says the government’s acceptance
of a transition period after Brexit is a good example of where they have been

listened to.

Over the aisle, businesses are building bridges with the Labour leadership.
Lobby groups now hold meetings with the shadow chancellor, John
McDonnell, and report that many of their concerns, such as the poor skills of
British workers, are shared by Labour. Rebecca Long-Bailey, the shadow
business minister, says that Labour is doing more to listen to entrepreneurs,
introducing constituency business-liaison officers, for instance. Yet proposals
to nationalise certain industries still make Labour pretty toxic, says one
sympathetic businessman, who hopes that economic reality would force a
Corbyn government to dilute its plans.

Josh Hardie, a deputy director of the CBI, argues that companies must adapt
to the changing political climate. He notes that public trust in companies has
declined. For example, “People were not listening to business’s concerns
over Brexit during the referendum campaign,” he says. That has made it
easier for politicians to make entrepreneurs the whipping boys in a new
populist rhetoric, deployed by Mrs May last year after the collapse of the
pension scheme for workers at BHS, a bankrupt retailer.

The private sector is thus coming up with plans to complement Mrs May’s
agenda. The government wants to tighten the rules on foreign takeovers, for
example. So on November 1st the EEF, a manufacturers’ organisation,
proposed a new procedure to assess whether takeovers “provide a net benefit
to the UK”. Firms must know their market, in politics as in business.

This article was downloaded by calibre from
https://www.economist.com/news/britain/21730896-it-choice-between-brexiteers-or-
marxists-beleaguered-businesspeople-time-some/print

| Section menu | Main menu |

| Next | Section menu | Main menu | Previous |

Letting out some air

London’s bubbly housing market goes flat

For the first time in years, the capital is performing worse than the rest of the
country

Nov 2nd 2017

SINCE 1990 the price of the average house in London has tripled in real

terms, easily outstripping the rest of the country. Millennials, many of whom
have lost all hope of buying a home, have a morbid fascination with stories
about the capital’s outrageous prices, including a recent one about a shabby,
narrowboat-sized house in west London which went on sale for £600,000
($790,000). Yet the market may be turning. Lately the rate of house-price
growth across Britain has slowed. But in London it has nosedived (see chart).
Why has the capital lost its fizz?

One pocket of weakness is London’s “prime” market, often defined as the
priciest 5-10% of homes. According to a recent report by Savills, a property
firm, prime prices in central London are 15% below their peak of three years
ago. Back then estate agents in Mayfair and St James’s would often sell
homes for more than £50m. Data about such mansions are murky, yet they
suggest that the maximum price in the area so far this year has been around
£30m. In Kensington and Chelsea, the poshest borough, house prices have
tumbled by 15% since January.

The travails of the prime market are partly due to worries about London’s
status after Brexit. Some plutocrats have already left; others want to rent, not
buy. Yet other factors have played a bigger role. In 2014 the government
made changes to stamp duty, a tax on homebuyers, which reduced it for most
but raised it for those buying houses worth more than about £1m. Recently
stamp duty became heavier still for those purchasing second homes. London
is stuffed with luxury pads—it accounts for over half the houses sold in
Britain for over £1m—so it is feeling these measures most keenly.

It is not just London’s luxury market, however, that has cooled down. Figures
from Hometrack, a consultancy, suggest that in all price brackets, prices are
less bubbly than they were a few years ago.

One possible explanation is increased supply. Surprisingly enough for a city
that feels so squashed, lately London’s rate of house building has risen. Last
year the stock of housing in the capital grew faster than it did elsewhere in
England. Savills expects total net completions to peak at 46,500 this year,
which is ahead of the target of at least 42,000 in the “London Plan”, a
blueprint from the mayor’s office. Extra supply has added to downward
pressure on prices.

However, changes to financial regulations may have had the biggest effect on
the London market, by curbing demand. In recent years, many people have
stepped onto the capital’s housing ladder only with the help of a huge
mortgage. In 2014 over 20% of buyers in the capital took out loans worth at
least 4.5 times their income, up from around 5% a decade before and double
the rate for Britain as a whole.

New rules to bolster Britain’s financial stability, which were introduced in
2014, have dissuaded banks from doing too much lending at big multiples of
income. Since then, the number of mortgages granted to first-time buyers has
slumped by over a tenth in the capital, while rising elsewhere. With many
potential buyers in effect forced out of the mortgage market altogether,
demand has been dampened.

London’s housing market may remain weak for a while yet. JLL, another
property firm, expects annual house-price growth in the capital of around 2%
over the next five years. Good news for the millennials, perhaps. Yet a period
of softer prices will not make it much easier to get a foot on London’s
property ladder, especially since mortgage regulation will remain strict. If
current trends persist, the ratio of London’s house prices to household income
will fall back to its long-run average only in 2040.

This article was downloaded by calibre from
https://www.economist.com/news/britain/21730914-first-time-years-capital-performing-
worse-rest-country-londons/print

| Section menu | Main menu |

| Next | Section menu | Main menu | Previous |

Tu casa es mi casa

The Catalan crisis adds to Gibraltar’s Brexit concerns

A surge in Spanish nationalism would come at an awkward time for Britain

Nov 2nd 2017

THE big drama in Spain today is over Catalonia’s bid for independence (see
article). But the Catalan affair could also have an impact some 530 miles
(850km) to the south-west, in Gibraltar. Recently Catalonia’s representative
in Britain, Sergi Marcén, said that Catalonia accepted British sovereignty
over the Rock, a clear dig at Madrid. Gibraltar’s chief minister, Fabian
Picardo, worries that Catalonia might now produce a surge in Spanish
patriotic feeling, just as Brexit is coming to a crunch moment.

The outcrop at the neck of the Mediterranean was ceded to Britain in the
Treaty of Utrecht of 1713, and has been squabbled over ever since. Mindful
of the risk that Brexit might give Spain leverage to reopen the issue of
sovereignty, Gibraltarians voted in last year’s Brexit referendum by 96% to
4% to stay in the EU, the highest Remain vote anywhere. Mr Picardo would
still prefer to be in the EU’s single market and customs union, but he says

Gibraltar has no option but to follow Britain, which plans to leave both. That
would protect British sovereignty over the Rock; he also points out that 90%
of Gibraltar’s trade is with Britain.

Mr Picardo, who has been chief minister since 2011, is proud of his economic
record. He says GDP has grown by 60% over the past six years, so Gibraltar
has the world’s fourth-highest GDP per head. Unemployment, according to
Mr Picardo, stands at a mere 84 people. Yet Brexit is a worry, given
Gibraltar’s dependence on financial services, online gambling and tourism,
all of which could suffer if access to the single market were curtailed.

The biggest problem is Spain. Madrid managed to insert into the EU’s Brexit
negotiating guidelines a provision giving Spain a veto over any deal on
Gibraltar. Mr Picardo notes that the Spanish foreign minister, Alfonso Dastis,
has pledged not to use Brexit to revive the sovereignty issue. But he is
concerned about the border, which Spain has often restricted and which was
closed from 1969 to 1982.

Some 13,000 people cross the border every day to work in Gibraltar. Mr
Picardo points to the huge benefits this produces in a poor part of a poor
region, Andalusia, which has long suffered from high unemployment. He
says that any action that led to hold-ups at the border, or to interference with
Gibraltar’s airport, which is built on partly reclaimed land that Spain says is
not covered by the Treaty of Utrecht, would be irrational.

The trouble is that people do not always behave rationally—as the Catalan
stand-off shows. Renewed Spanish nationalism might easily affect the Rock.
No proud Spaniard will ever accept British sovereignty, whatever Catalans
say. The border was reopened in the 1980s only because Spain wanted to join
the EU. Gibraltar, once seen as collateral damage from Brexit, could yet
become collateral damage from the battle over Catalonia.

This article was downloaded by calibre from
https://www.economist.com/news/britain/21730815-surge-spanish-nationalism-would-come-
awkward-time-britain-catalan-crisis-adds/print

| Section menu | Main menu |

| Next | Section menu | Main menu | Previous |

Everyone v gown

Britain’s universities are under fire from all sides

Right-wingers are on their case over Brexit, liberals fret about free speech,
and everyone seems to be sick of fees

Nov 2nd 2017

THERE are few things in which Britain can still claim to lead the world, but
higher education is one. The country’s grandest universities top global
league-tables. They attract many of the world’s best researchers, as well as
students from every continent. The Department for Education found that
income from foreign students and research contracts was worth £12.4bn
($20.6bn) in 2014. Yet, at a time of widening political division, politicians
and pundits of all hues are united by a growing scepticism about universities.

From the right, they are under fire for their opposition to Brexit. On October
24th it emerged that Chris Heaton-Harris, an MP and government whip, had
written to all university vice-chancellors to ask for the names of professors
“who are involved in the teaching of European affairs, with particular
reference to Brexit”. Universities interpreted Mr Heaton-Harris’s letter as a

threat to academic freedom, and complained angrily. The Daily Mail declared
the backlash “a troubling insight” into the academy; “Our Remainer
Universities”, roared its front page. Some Tory MPs are troubled by polls
showing the left-wing attitudes of academics, says Nick Hillman of the
Higher Education Policy Institute, a think-tank. Brexit has stoked such fears.

At the other end of the political spectrum, liberals worry that universities
have not done enough to protect free speech. In recent years student activists
have tried to block talks by figures such as Germaine Greer, a feminist who
was held to be transphobic, and Nick Lowles, an anti-racism campaigner who
was accused of being Islamophobic for criticising extremism. Although such
attempts rarely succeed, many worry about their suffocating effect, with news
reports often exaggerating their impact. The Daily Telegraph recently
reported, incorrectly, that the Cambridge student union’s women’s officer
was forcing the university to “drop white authors” from the English
curriculum.

Voices on the left are also criticising universities over their admissions
policies. David Lammy, a Labour MP and former education minister, last
month accused Oxford and Cambridge of fostering “social apartheid” after he
obtained figures showing that 16 Oxbridge colleges did not admit a single
black A-level pupil in 2015.

Perhaps most worrying for universities, however, is the area where left and
right seem to be finding common cause: money. Jeremy Corbyn, Labour’s
far-left leader, has promised to abolish tuition fees and fund higher education
out of general taxation, something that universities fear would choke their
budgets. Lord Adonis, a former Labour education minister and one of the
architects of the fees system, now tweets incessantly against what he calls the
“cartel” of English universities, which he accuses of failing to justify the high
fees (of £9,250 a year) that they are allowed to charge, and wasting the cash
on extravagant salaries for bureaucrats.

Shake it to the left

The Conservatives, for their part, are spooked by Mr Corbyn’s recent
electoral gains, particularly among young voters. Many Tories now want to
lower tuition fees, which, as one party aide notes, would at least be easier

than solving the housing crisis, the other big millennial complaint.

There was little opposition when Mrs May announced at the Tory party
conference last month that she would freeze the cap on tuition fees and would
set up a review of the funding regime. Potential successors to Mrs May,
including David Davis, have been quick to make clear that they, too, have
doubts about the current funding regime. In a sign of the changing political
environment, the Centre for Policy Studies, a Thatcherite think-tank, released
a paper in October which urged the government to cut fees to avoid a
“financial time-bomb” of unpaid loans.

Universities have done a poor job of defending themselves against this
concerted criticism. Following Mr Heaton-Harris’s ill-judged letter,
hyperbolic comparisons by academics to Soviet Russia and McCarthyite
America did little to help their cause. They have struggled to transmit the
message that higher fees mean more university places for poor pupils.
Although vice-chancellors act as an army of well-connected lobbyists, they
are not always effective at shaping public debate. “Universities sometimes
give the impression that they only care about finance when it applies to their
balance-sheet,” rather than when it affects their students, says Wes Streeting,
a Labour MP and former head of the national students’ union. Michael
Arthur, the president of University College London, complains that “when it
comes to fees we’re portrayed as being a bit greedy.”

The more critical atmosphere has already had an impact. The government is
keen to promote its reforms designed to make universities work harder for
their fees, including a new teaching ranking and a beefed-up regulator. The
freeze on fees may not look like much yet, but it will cause university income
to be eroded by inflation every year until it is lifted. Meanwhile Jo Johnson,
the universities minister, recently announced vague plans to impose fines on
institutions that fail to uphold free speech.

The past two decades have witnessed a big increase in higher-education
attendance; it is not surprising that there is more scrutiny of what goes on.
That does not make it any more comfortable for universities to be the ones
under examination.

This article was downloaded by calibre from
https://www.economist.com/news/britain/21730885-right-wingers-are-their-case-over-
brexit-liberals-fret-about-free-speech-and-everyone-seems/print

| Section menu | Main menu |

| Next | Section menu | Main menu | Previous |

Bagehot

The Palace of Pestminster faces up to accusations of sexual predation

Parliament is being shaken by the revelations. About time

Nov 4th 2017

IT WAS only a matter of time before Hurricane Harvey reached the Palace of
Westminster. The Weinstein storm has ripped through a succession of
institutions that combine male power with blurred lines between professional
and social life. Few institutions combine these two things quite as explosively
as the Houses of Parliament.

Now it has struck with a vengeance, shaking Brexit off the front pages and
even raising questions about the future of the government. Sir Michael
Fallon, the defence secretary, has resigned on the grounds that his past
personal conduct has “fallen below the high standards that we require of the
armed forces”. A senior civil servant is conducting an inquiry into the
conduct of two other ministers: Damian Green, the deputy prime minister,
who denies accusations that he made unwanted advances to a woman 30
years his junior, and Mark Garnier, a trade minister, who nicknamed his

assistant “sugar tits” and dispatched her to buy sex toys. Unnamed people in
politics are accused of far worse. Bex Bailey, a Labour activist, has said that
she was raped by a “party figure” and then discouraged from reporting it by
Labour apparatchiks. The Westminster gossip mill, never idle even at the
quietest of times, is whirring madly, aided by leaked party dossiers on MPs,
insinuating photographs in newspapers and snippets from private WhatsApp
groups.

The revelations are destabilising an already wobbly government. Sir Michael
was one of its most experienced figures. He provided ballast against political
storms and a bridge between ideologues on both sides of the Brexit divide.
Based on what was known at the time of his resignation, his departure has
lowered the bar for career-ending conduct. It has also reinforced the sense
that the government is at the mercy of events that it cannot control: future
revelations could force more ministers to resign or compel the government to
withdraw the whip from erring MPs. The focus is now on Mr Green, Theresa
May’s oldest friend in politics and another emollient figure who has provided
political sense in a cabinet that is lacking it.

The scandal raises broader issues about how women are treated in British
politics. Parliament has all the characteristics of other male-dominated
institutions in spades: family-hostile (and bachelor-friendly) hours, pack
behaviour, a culture of drinking. No women sat in Parliament until 1919; as
recently as 1997 they made up less than 10% of MPs. When Margaret
Thatcher got into the cabinet in 1970 she was only the sixth woman to rise so
high.

Politics is also a peculiar business. Social functions and political functions
are fused. Campaigns are all-consuming. Pressing the flesh is a way of life.
MPs have enormous power over whom they hire, but little guidance in how
to manage them. They are not just representatives of the public but
businesspeople who run their own offices. MPs who are not lucky enough to
have London seats have no choice but to live double lives, spending their
weekends in their constituencies and their weeks in the capital. They live
double lives in another way, too, arriving in Westminster thinking that they
might be the next Winston Churchill or Nye Bevan, but ending up as lobby
fodder. The combination of loneliness and frustrated ambition, vanity and

disappointment, encourages aberrant behaviour.

Erring MPs are accountable to their parties rather than to more formal
bureaucratic structures. And parties have every incentive to keep secret any
information that reflects badly on them, since exposing it could cause a
scandal or a by-election. Parties can also use such information to keep their
MPs in line. Whips’ offices maintain “black books” of their own MPs’
secrets, to dangle over members threatening to rebel.

There is still a question as to how widespread the most serious offences are.
Rumours ranging from consensual affairs, to unspecified “inappropriateness”,
to serious sexual assaults have been unhelpfully lumped together. Some of
the MPs accused of inappropriate behaviour have said they fear a witch hunt
that will blur the distinction between facts and gossip, affairs and
transgressions, and misjudged passes and coercion. Yet there is a difference
between keeping a clear head and downplaying the scandals. Parliament is
grappling with two problems: a cultural one of how women are treated in
political life and a criminal one of sexual assault. But these two problems can
blur into each other. MPs are more likely to abuse their power over their
subordinates if they operate in a world of casual sexist banter.

A blast of fresh air

MPs already have a net trust rating of -74%. The latest revelations may
entrench contempt for politicians, encouraging the harmful populist rage
against “the establishment” and discouraging talented people from working in
the Pestminster swamp. Yet this week also gave some cause for optimism.
The debate has highlighted how far women have advanced in recent years.
They now make up a third of MPs and run three of the four countries of the
United Kingdom. Digital forums such as WhatsApp give them tools to share
their experiences privately and organise resistance. Parliament’s debate on
sexual harassment on October 30th was notable for its maturity and good
sense. John Bercow, the speaker, Andrea Leadsom, the leader of the House,
and Harriet Harman, Labour’s representative, promised to tackle the problem
swiftly. They also demonstrated that they recognise how doing so means
addressing attitudes as well as setting up complaints systems.

The MPs’ expenses scandal of 2009 diminished Parliament’s reputation

because MPs collectively failed to deal with the problem quickly and
convincingly. There is a chance that, if properly handled, the sexual-
harassment scandal could help clean up behaviour in Parliament, improve its
reputation and persuade more young people, particularly women, to make a
career in politics. Some hurricanes wreak a creative kind of destruction.

Economist.com/blogs/bagehot

This article was downloaded by calibre from
https://www.economist.com/news/britain/21730888-parliament-being-shaken-revelations-
about-time-palace-pestminster-faces-up/print

| Section menu | Main menu |

| Next section | Main menu | Previous section |

International

Lawsuits against climate change: New green advocates [Thu, 02

Nov 23:23]

| Next section | Main menu | Previous section |

| Next | Section menu | Main menu |

New Green advocates

Climate-change lawsuits

Global warming is increasingly being fought in the courtroom

Nov 2nd 2017

IN FEBRUARY a tribunal in Kirkenes, in Norway’s far north, ruled that oil
extraction in the Barents Sea was illegal. The courtroom—an auditorium
sculpted from 190 tonnes of ice, pictured above—and the verdict were
fictitious, staged as part of a festival. But the legal question is real.

On November 14th a district court in Oslo, Norway’s capital, will begin
hearing the case that inspired the theatrics. Greenpeace and another pressure
group, Nature and Youth, allege that by issuing licences to explore for oil in
the Arctic, Norway’s government has breached its constitutional obligation to
preserve an environment that is “conducive to health” and to maintain
environmental “productivity and diversity”. Their case rests not on local
harms, for example to wildlife or water quality, but on the contribution any
oil extracted will make to global warming which, under the Paris accord of
2015, Norway and 195 other countries have pledged to keep to “well below”

2°C compared with pre-industrial times.

As policymakers prepare for the annual UN climate pow-wow in Germany,
starting on November 6th, activists who think too little is being done to meet
that goal are turning to the courts. Cases where the negative effects of carbon
emissions are central, not tagged on to more direct environmental damage,
such as oil spills or the release of noxious chemicals, are on the rise. Joana
Setzer of the Grantham Institute, a think-tank in London, has found 64 such
cases in countries other than America in the past 15 years. Twenty-one were
lodged since 2015 (see chart 1). In litigious America around 20 are now filed
each year, up from a couple in 2002.

The targets are governments, which campaigners argue are doing too little to
avert climate change, and big energy firms, which they hold responsible for
most greenhouse-gas emissions. A day before the Oslo hearings, for instance,
a German tribunal will consider an appeal by Saúl Luciano Lliuya, a Peruvian
who sued RWE, a big German electricity producer. He argues that it is partly
liable for melting Andean glaciers that have raised the level of water in a lake
that threatens to flood Huaraz, his home town.

Making it stick

The legal obstacles are formidable. Like the lower court in Lliuya v RWE,
many courts have peremptorily dismissed climate lawsuits as groundless.
Climatologists deal in probabilities, so it is hard to establish a causal link
between a country’s or company’s emissions and the damage wrought by
greenhouse gases. Singling out one among countless emitters is a stretch.

Even so, the occasional case succeeds. Two years ago a court in the
Netherlands agreed with Urgenda, an environmental group, that the Dutch
government’s target of a 17% cut in carbon emissions by 2020, compared
with the level in 1990, fell short of its constitutional “duty of care” towards
Dutch society. It ordered a cut of at least 25%. The same year a high court in
Pakistan upheld an earlier decision in a case brought by Ashgar Leghari, a
farmer, that “the delay and lethargy of the State in implementing [its climate
policies] offend the fundamental rights of the citizens”. It directed the
government to make a list of priorities and create an independent commission
to monitor progress.

The prospect for climate-friendly verdicts is improving, says Sophie
Marjanac of ClientEarth, an advocacy group, for two reasons. The first is the
growing volume of climate-related commitments for which governments can
be held to account. The second is advances in climate science.

Globally, the number of national climate-change laws and policies has
swelled from around 60 in 1997 to nearly 1,400 (see chart 2). A survey in
2012 found that 177 countries had laws, regulations or court rulings
guaranteeing the right to a clean or healthy environment. In at least 92 that
right was constitutional. Greenpeace v Norway was made possible by a
change to the country’s basic charter in 2014, which in effect converted
preserving a healthy, productive and diverse environment from a suggestion
into an obligation. It would have been harder for Mr Leghari to win had the
Pakistani government not spelled out 734 “action points”, 232 of which
deserved priority.

The Paris accord is playing a role. Like many environmental treaties, it does
not bind signatories to fulfil their obligations, merely enjoins them to do so.
But plaintiffs can assess governments’ and firms’ actions against the 2°C
goal.

Such assessments are aided by a growing understanding of Earth’s climate
and humanity’s effects on it. Scientists are increasingly confident that they
know roughly what shares of the greenhouse gases in the atmosphere were
emitted by individual countries, and even by the biggest corporate polluters.

The Carbon Majors Database, compiled by Richard Heede, a geographer,
tallies historical emissions by fossil-fuel firms and other heavy carbon
emitters such as cement-makers. He finds that just 90 belched out 63% of all
greenhouse gases between 1751 and 2010. Campaigners seek to argue that
these deep-pocketed firms, and not their customers, are ultimately responsible
for the emissions, just as cigarette-makers were held liable for their products
whereas retailers who sold them on to consumers were not.

Splitting the bill

Mr Heede’s calculations, which most scientists accept, mean that
responsibility for past and future warming can be apportioned—at least in
principle. Mr Lliuya’s claim of €17,000 ($19,800) against RWE corresponds
to 0.5% of the cost of protecting his town against the glacial melt. That 0.5%
is the utility’s estimated share of cumulative global greenhouse-gas
emissions, chiefly from all the coal it has mined. Likewise San Francisco,
Oakland and three other Californian counties have sued dozens of carbon
majors, including BP, Chevron, ExxonMobil and Royal Dutch Shell, for
damages proportional to their share.

Scientists are also becoming more willing to blame carbon emissions, not just
for global warming, but for specific natural disasters such as heatwaves,
floods and superstorms. But so far no plaintiff has been awarded damages on
the basis of such attribution arguments. After a legal battle that lasted from
2005 to 2012, an American federal court threw out a case brought by
residents of Mississippi against 34 big carbon emitters for damages suffered
as a result of Hurricane Katrina, which they argued had been made more
devastating by climate change. The court decided that the plaintiffs lacked
“standing”, in other words that they could not prove that they had suffered an
injury, that the injury could be traced back to the defendant, and that the court
could redress it (for instance by ordering damages to be paid).

But “attribution research” has made strides in the 14 years since Myles Allen
of Oxford University introduced the notion of “climate liability” for
calamities. The first Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society devoted
to attribution studies, in 2012, contained just six papers. Last year’s edition
contained 26, and many more were turned down for lack of space.

Researchers are even beginning to combine individual emitters’ climate
impacts with event attribution. In a paper just published in Nature Climate
Change, for instance, Friederike Otto of Oxford University and colleagues
(including Professor Allen) conclude that carbon emissions from America
and the European Union each raised the frequency of a particularly
devastating heatwave in Argentina by roughly a third. This increased chance,
the scientists argued, could be interpreted as their share of responsibility for a
scorcher four years ago. Many courts already accept probabilistic arguments,
for example in cases of occupational hazards. In Britain and America judges
have ruled that firms “caused” workers to be exposed to toxic substances if
the risk of exposure doubled.

Ms Marjanac expects attribution suits on similar grounds as the science
develops. In the meantime most plaintiffs are sticking to settled science. In
Norway, Greenpeace is relying on the widely accepted findings of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, which says that, to meet the
Paris goal, oil production should be wound down, not ramped up. The
Californian counties have taken care to sue only those carbon majors with
operations in the state.

Plaintiffs are also using established legal arguments, albeit in novel ways—
alleging, for instance, that rising sea levels caused by companies’ carbon
emissions constitute trespass on county land. They are learning from one
another. A lawsuit modelled on Urgenda’s is under way in Belgium. On
October 23rd an Irish court agreed to hear another. A court in Oregon will
hear a similar one in February. A group of Brazilian NGOs hopes to file its
own by April. Following successful lawsuits against cigarette manufacturers,
courts are putting new stress on the fact that energy firms have long known
about the harm caused by carbon emissions but have done nothing about it.

Defendants, for their part, usually argue that, whatever the climate science or
the harms caused by greenhouse gases, they are simply not liable. Climate
treaties presume that each country is responsible for its own emissions, says
Fredrik Sejersted, Norway’s attorney-general, who will argue the case against
Greenpeace. “So Norway does not have a legal responsibility for emissions
from oil and gas it exports.” No one denies that the Netherlands emits carbon
dioxide, says Edward Brans, an environmental lawyer who is representing the

Dutch government in its appeal against the Urgenda ruling. The question is:
“Are the government’s actions unlawful?”

America’s Supreme Court is highly unlikely to discover “a constitutional
right to a stable climate” any time soon, says Michael Burger of Columbia
University’s Sabin Centre for Climate Change Law. Its courts hesitate to rule
on issues generally regarded as the preserve of the legislature or the executive
branch. Federal courts often decline to consider lawsuits regarding
negligence, nuisance, trespass and the like stemming from carbon-dioxide
emissions, arguing that these are already regulated by the Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA) under a federal law, the Clean Air Act of 1963,
which prevails over common law in its remit.

For now, plaintiffs approach state courts because federal statutes do not
displace common law at the state level. In climate-friendly jurisdictions such
as California, a jury could conceivably find in their favour, says Tracy Hester
of the University of Houston. But he adds that, if President Donald Trump or
Republicans in Congress relieved the EPA of its obligation to regulate
greenhouse gases, the way may be opened for lawsuits in federal courts.

Courting the public

In Norway an opinion poll in August found for the first time that more people
would prefer to leave some oil in the ground in order to limit emissions than
to extract it all. This may not influence the Oslo court’s decision. But as
citizens’ concerns about climate change grow, so will the prospect of real-life
verdicts that resemble Kirkenes’s fictional one.

This article was downloaded by calibre from
https://www.economist.com/news/international/21730881-global-warming-increasingly-
being-fought-courtroom-climate-change-lawsuits/print

| Section menu | Main menu |

| Next section | Main menu | Previous section |

Business

Health care in America: The right dose? [Thu, 02 Nov 23:23]
Trends in tourism: Fatal attractions [Thu, 02 Nov 23:23]
IKEA and the internet: Frictionless furnishing [Thu, 02 Nov 23:23]
Driving in Myanmar: On the other hand [Thu, 02 Nov 23:23]
Japanese business: The wa forward [Thu, 02 Nov 23:23]
Qatar Airways: Plane diplomacy [Thu, 02 Nov 23:23]
Schumpeter: Making Europe great again [Thu, 02 Nov 23:23]

| Next section | Main menu | Previous section |

| Next | Section menu | Main menu |

The right dose?

A merger between CVS Health and Aetna could be what the doctor
ordered

Vertical integration could put a brake on America’s unsustainably soaring
health-care costs

Nov 4th 2017 | NEW YORK

STANLEY and Sidney Goldstein would scarcely recognise their creation. In
1963 the brothers opened a humble storefront in Lowell, Massachusetts,
selling health and beauty products. Determined to put customers first, they
named their enterprise Consumer Value Stores. Today the Goldsteins’
startup, soon afterwards sold to a bigger firm, is nothing short of a health-care
Goliath.

Revenues at CVS Health reached $177bn last year, riches which come from
9,700 retail pharmacies and from its operations in mail-order drugs and sales
of more expensive speciality medicines. The firm commands nearly a quarter
of the American market for prescription drug sales (see chart). It is also the
biggest pharmacy-benefit manager (PBM) in America, a type of middleman

that negotiates bulk discounts on drugs with large pharmaceutical firms on
behalf of employers and insurers.

Yet even that formidable position is not enough. CVS is reported to have
made a bid for Aetna, a big American health insurer (both firms have refused
to comment publicly). Aetna, which had revenues last year of about $63bn, is
in a different business, serving mainly corporate clients by providing health
insurance for their employees. The two companies already have a
relationship, however, since CVS has a contract to serve as Aetna’s PBM. If

consummated, the transaction would be one of the biggest ever in American
health care (and a tie-up between the two would doubtless encourage other
transactions of a similar nature). That raises two questions. Why would the
two be contemplating a deal? And crucially, given the tendency of prior
mergers to fatten profit margins rather than lower prices, would such
consolidation yield benefits to consumers?

Start with the reasons for a deal. Health care is becoming increasingly
unaffordable for American consumers. Since 2014, total health-care cost
inflation has been 6-7%, owing to growth in the cost of everything from
doctors and hospitals to medical devices and drugs. Such large rises cannot
continue indefinitely.

Drug retailers in particular fear the prospect of Amazon entering their
business. The e-commerce titan was recently reported to have sought
regulatory approval to distribute pharmaceutical products in a dozen or so
states. That news, which broke in October, prompted sharp falls in the shares
of several firms in the pharmaceutical supply chain.

Selling drugs would be harder for Amazon than out-competing department
stores, in part because consumers do not typically pay much of the cost of
drugs (insurers do). If it has serious ambitions in health care, it might even be
forced to build or buy a PBM. Even so, history suggests that the firm’s
relentless focus on consumers and willingness to forgo profits for years make
it a huge potential threat to incumbent pharmacies.

PBMs, once seen as cash cows, also face an uncertain future. These
middlemen took off in the 2000s by promising to cut drug prices through
aggregating demand and negotiating discounts with Big Pharma. Pembroke,
an industry consultancy, estimates that the total value of drug rebates and
discounts soared from $39bn in 2008 to $125bn in 2015. Some PBMs used
questionable practices, including secret rebates (in addition to the discounts
negotiated upfront on drug prices, that were passed on to PBM customers),
which allowed them to pocket much of the savings rather than pass them on
to insurers and employers and in turn, to consumers.

Anthem, a big health insurer, sued Express Scripts, which it fired as its PBM,
for $15bn last year, alleging that the latter firm had withheld savings and

overcharged it by huge sums (Express Scripts denies the allegations). In
October Anthem unveiled plans to launch its own in-house PBM with help
from CVS. UnitedHealth, another giant health insurer, acquired Catamaran, a
big PBM, in 2015, and merged it into OptumRx, its in-house PBM.

Greater transparency in pricing is coming, argues Viren Mehta of Mehta
Partners, an industry consultancy, be that through vertical integration (as in
the purported deal between CVS and Aetna) or via the entry of a titan like
Amazon. “If opacity is reduced, the PBMs lose market power and profits,” he
says.

This combination of forces explains why a CVS-Aetna merger might make
sense: to make CVS a more formidable competitor against possible new
entrants, such as Amazon, into the bit of the business started by the
Goldsteins, and to extract efficiencies by cutting out the middlemen in the
health-care supply chain. Other such deals are easy to imagine. Analysts
reckon that insurance firms including WellCare, Centene and Humana are
potential targets for acquisition. As the biggest stand-alone PBM, Express
Scripts is thought to be a potential target, too. Anthem, which may lose CVS
as a partner if antitrust authorities prise the two firms apart as a condition of
approving a CVS-Aetna deal, may soon be shopping for a new PBM.

The specific nature of these sorts of tie-up offers some reason to hope that the
answer to the second question—whether consolidation will benefit
consumers—will turn out to be positive. In the past, firms have typically
joined horizontally within a market segment. This has generally led to

oligopolies that enjoy fat profits but do little to lower prices and lift quality
for patients. Such horizontal mergers have been increasingly frowned upon
by regulators in recent years.

Up and down, not across

The CVS-Aetna deal is an effort at vertical integration, which by removing
rent-seeking middlemen can, in theory at least, lead to more choice, better
health outcomes and lower prices for consumers. If this seems far-fetched,
consider the example of United’s pioneering use of data analytics and
artificial intelligence at its in-house PBM. As costs spiral upwards, insurers’
interest in ensuring the good health of consumers deepens. Because United
can now analyse both a patient’s medical files and her pharmacy records, it
can track how medications are taken and whether or not they work well. A
small group of integrated health-care systems in America, such as Kaiser
Permanente, Intermountain and the Mayo Clinic, has been shown to have
delivered better care and lower costs. 

By creating a much more integrated firm, the CVS-Aetna deal could do the
same. CVS already has more than a thousand MinuteClinics (cheap and
cheerful health centres) at its pharmacies offering affordable medical care
seven days a week. The combined firm would offer everything from basic
health services to diagnostics to drug-infusion centres. It would have a strong
incentive to make sure that customers have good access to primary care,
including vaccinations, medical information, prescriptions, and follow-ups.
“Consumers would save through lower premiums, lower out-of-pocket
spending at preferred CVS outlets, or both,” reckons Adam Fein of
Pembroke. Moreover, the accumulation of data on what interventions work
best in similar patients would speed the personalisation of medicine.

In truth, no one knows how a CVS-Aetna deal would affect consumers of
health care, as this structure of transaction, at this scale, has not been tried.
The concern for patients—and for trustbusters—is what would happen if
customers of a combined firm wanted to receive care from other clinics or
buy drugs from other pharmacies, perhaps because it was restricting choice or
increasing co-payments. The reason for hope is that this vertical deal could
become a template for a new sort of health-care firm, which offers a lower-
cost ecosystem of quality health care. That could be a boon to consumers; it

would have pleased the Goldstein brothers, too.

This article was downloaded by calibre from
https://www.economist.com/news/business/21730906-vertical-integration-could-put-brake-
americas-unsustainably-soaring-health-care-costs/print

| Section menu | Main menu |

| Next | Section menu | Main menu | Previous |

Fatal attractions

Dark tourism spooks its way into the mainstream

Visitor numbers for Salem, Chernobyl, celebrity graves and other fright sites
are soaring

Nov 2nd 2017 | SALEM

ONE recent morning in Salem, in the state of Massachusetts, a witch ran out
of wands. Teri Kalgren, the owner of Artemisia Botanicals, an apothecary
and magic shop, attributed the shortage to a boom in visitors. People have
long flocked to Salem to learn about the infamous witch trials of 1692, in
which Puritan hysteria led to the executions of 20 people (and two dogs). But
since 1982, when the city introduced Haunted Happenings, a day-long
Halloween festival for local families, the event has expanded into a
celebration that lasts for a month and attracts 500,000 tourists. In 2016
tourism pumped $104m into Salem and funded some 800 jobs.

On America’s opposite coast, Scott Michaels can also attest to the allure of
the macabre. He has watched his Hollywood-based company, Dearly
Departed Tours, grow from a one-man gig to an operation with seven

employees who take tourists to celebrity grave sites every day of the week.
“Just a few years ago, we were just the quirky ones doing tours in an old
hearse,” says Mr Michaels.

The fact that tourism is soaring is well-known—between 1999 and 2016 the
number of people opting for a foreign holiday doubled, according to the UN
World Tourism Organisation (UNWTO). As travellers embrace experiences,
rather than just heading to the pool, visits to “dark tourism” sites have risen in
tandem. This catch-all term includes sites of atrocities such as Auschwitz or
Cambodia’s killing fields; nuclear disaster zones such as Chernobyl in
Ukraine and the Fukushima Dai-ichi power plant in Japan; and other morbid
locations, such as the house where O.J. Simpson’s ex-wife was killed. The
internet has raised awareness of such places; cheap flights have made them
easier to get to.

Take Chernobyl. The nuclear disaster at a power plant in what is now
Ukraine, in 1986, killed more than 30 workers, afflicted thousands with
radiation poisoning and forced 180,000 Soviet citizens to abandon their
homes. A decade ago Dominik Orfanus, a Slovakian journalist, visited
Pripyat, a modern city turned into a ghost town by the explosion, and founded
a tour company. The number of visitors to the “exclusion zone” has since
jumped (from 7,191 in 2009 to 36,781 in 2016). An easing of government
restrictions in 2011 and Ukraine’s hosting of the 2012 European football
championship helped numbers swell further. CHERNOBYL.wel.come, Mr
Orfanus’s company, is one of three such firms which, collectively, have more
than 2,000 reviews on TripAdvisor, a travel-review website. It hands out
shirts with slogans such as “Enjoy Chernobyl, die later”.

Commodifying Chernobyl can be justified by the passage of time and the fact
that tourism is seen by locals as a boon to their stunted economy. Salem is
also easy to commercialise because the deaths occurred so long ago. But
recent tragedies demand greater sensitivity. Japanese authorities have banned
tours to the vicinity of Fukushima Dai-ichi nuclear power plant, which went
into meltdown after an earthquake caused a tsunami that engulfed the coast in
2011, killing nearly 19,000 people. Local guides still take over 2,000 tourists
each year to villages near the reactors.

Michael Frazier, of the National September 11 Memorial & Museum in New

York, bristles at the word “attraction,” even though the museum charges
admission, sells souvenirs and markets itself on its website as TripAdvisor’s
“#2” of 1,055 Things to Do in New York City. It is also “#6” of the World’s
Most Instagrammed Museums. Last year more than 3m visitors brought in
$67m for the non-profit foundation that runs the museum.

At the 9/11 museum and at Auschwitz, crowds are controlled with carefully
timed tours. At Chernobyl, however, sometimes “there are so many buses
that all of a sudden the ghost town feels like Disneyland,” says Mr Orfanus.
Carolyn Childs of MyTravelResearch.com, a research firm, sees plenty of
room for thoughtful architecture firms and design consultancies to help sites
walk the fine line between commemoration and commercialisation.

Death sells, says Philip Stone of the Institute for Dark Tourism Research at
the University of Central Lancashire. But most dark tourists seek meaning,
not merely the macabre. His research into their motives reveals not so much
oddballs ticking atrocities off a list as amateur scholars of human nature. The
Salem Witch Museum tries to cater to such cerebral interest, casting witch-
hunts as a staple of America’s political culture. It cites cases such as Japanese
internment after the attack on Pearl Harbour in 1941, and Senator Joe
McCarthy’s scapegoating of alleged communists in the 1950s. A guide asks a
crowd clad in black and orange to come up with modern parallels. The
visitors leave deep in thought.

This article was downloaded by calibre from https://www.economist.com/news/business-
and-finance/21730816-visitor-numbers-salem-chernobyl-celebrity-grave-sites-and-other-
frights-are-soaring/print

| Section menu | Main menu |

| Next | Section menu | Main menu | Previous |

Frictionless furnishing

IKEA undertakes some home improvements

The furniture giant is belatedly deepening its presence in e-commerce

Nov 2nd 2017

ON A Sunday afternoon, just beyond London’s M25 ring road, shoppers
participate in the ritual that is a trip to IKEA. Fuelled by a lunch of Swedish
meatballs, they negotiate their way around the 400,000-square-foot maze of a
store, past children playing hide and seek and couples arguing over the merits
of a PAX over a HEMNES wardrobe. Hours later, they emerge, wearily
pushing trolleys loaded with flat-pack furniture and far more tea lights than
they had intended to buy. The joy of assembly still awaits them.

This experience has changed remarkably little since the late 1950s, when
IKEA, which is still privately owned, set up its first store in southern Sweden
and found that people would travel long distances for low-cost, self-
assembled goods. IKEA has become the world’s largest seller of furniture,
with over 400 shops around the world and €38bn ($42bn) of revenue.

But now it is acknowledging that customers might want to shop in new ways.
In what Torbjörn Lööf, chief executive of Inter IKEA, which owns the brand,
has described as its biggest change in interacting with customers since the
IKEA concept was founded, it has said it will experiment with selling
furniture on third-party online platforms (it already sells items on its own
site). It is not yet known whether it will sell on Amazon or China’s Alibaba,
the biggest names in e-commerce.

The firm also recognises that DIY labour does not always make people
fonder of their purchases. In September IKEA Group, which runs most of the
retail outlets, announced its acquisition of TaskRabbit, an app that, among
other things, connects handymen to customers with odd jobs to be done.
Taken together with other changes introduced in recent years—such as a
handful of click-and-collect sites in some city centres, home delivery and a
new augmented-reality app for smartphones to help customers visualise
furniture in their homes—it is clear that the company is keen to create
alternatives to its vast suburban outlets.

Such steps seem overdue. According to a survey of 29 countries by PwC, a
consulting firm, around 30% of respondents would rather buy furniture on the
internet than in shops. Although footfall at individual IKEA stores has been
falling since 2015, the number of visits to the group’s website has increased
by over a fifth (see chart). Yet in 2016 online sales accounted for only 4% of
the firm’s total revenue. IKEA has doubtless noticed that an American
competitor, Ashley Furniture, successfully sells its goods on Amazon, and
that Alibaba, too, carries several ranges of furniture.

The new strategy carries the usual risks faced by firms going online.
Customers are not shifting entirely to e-commerce, notes Marc-André Kamel
of Bain & Company, a consulting firm, but wish to mix and match channels.
Mr Lööf therefore has little choice but to offer customers both physical and
digital options, which could raise costs. IKEA is still planning bricks-and-
mortar expansion both in established markets, such as Britain, and in new
ones, such as India next year and South America and South-East Asia in the
future.

Its plan to experiment with using big third-party online sellers such as
Amazon is surprising, says Mr Kamel, because it would need to cede some
control over its branding. Being on Amazon or Alibaba would also invite
direct comparison with other furniture manufacturers on price and quality.
The Swedish giant is betting that it can win new customers online who would
never trek to its superstores. But if it simply substitutes offline demand for
online sales it could lose out, because it would have to hand over a big chunk
of its profit margin to third parties (at least there is plenty to go round; IKEA
Group’s gross profit margin averaged 40% between 2012 and 2016).

Another risk comes from the demands of a new type of customer. IKEA is
used to people who are willing to spend time on assembly in return for low
prices, but will now try to appeal to online buyers who demand cheap, quick
delivery. Keeping them happy will be hard. Online reviews of IKEA’s new-
style click-and-collect store in London complain of long lead times and slow
service. Constructing a sturdy new sales model, rather like a flat-pack
cupboard, could turn out to be trickier than IKEA claims.

This article was downloaded by calibre from
https://www.economist.com/news/business/21730910-furniture-giant-belatedly-deepening-
its-presence-e-commerce-ikea-undertakes-some-home/print

| Section menu | Main menu |

| Next | Section menu | Main menu | Previous |

On the other hand

Many Japanese-made cars enjoy an afterlife in Myanmar, but not for
much longer

The government is outlawing right-hand-drive cars

Nov 2nd 2017 | YANGON

THE Japanese make cars that last but replace them relatively quickly. The
average car in Japan is three years younger than in America. This
combination of durable manufacturing and dutiful consumption of a prized
national product works out well for the rest of the world; many countries
import older Japanese cars in bulk. Secondhand vehicles fill vast parking lots
in Japan’s port cities, awaiting shipment to New Zealand, the United Arab
Emirates and elsewhere.

The third-most-popular destination is Myanmar, which imported over 80,000
used Japanese vehicles in the first nine months of this year, according to
Japan’s International Auto Trade Association. Drivers believe that Toyotas,
Hondas and Nissans can stand up to the country’s pockmarked roads, a faith
not yet shown in South Korean and Chinese cars.

There is only one problem, which is that Japan drives on the left, Myanmar
on the right. As a consequence, most of Myanmar’s drivers sit on the wrong
side of the car, where it is harder to see oncoming traffic. Settle into the
passenger seat of a Honda taxi on a narrow rural road and you may be called
upon to perform unexpected duties like telling your driver when it is safe to
overtake a slow-moving lorry, without hitting a scooter, gaggle of children or
bonnet-less jalopy travelling in the other direction.

Not everyone executes these responsibilities successfully. Myanmar has the
highest rate of deaths per vehicle among the ten members of the Association
of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN), according to the World Health
Organisation. Evidence of accidents litters the roadside outside Yangon: a
silver Toyota that has lost everything in front of its windscreen and a red
Suzuki hatchback that also now has a hatchfront.

Myanmar’s government periodically tightens the import rules to keep older
and less safe cars off the country’s roads. In October it said it will allow
individuals to import only cars built in 2016 or after. And after this year, it
will no longer grant import permits for right-hand-drive cars.

The tighter policy may encourage local car assembly. Suzuki will open a new
factory for left-hand-drive cars outside Yangon next year, adding to its
existing plant in the city’s east. But the change will oblige drivers to buy cars
that are either more expensive or less authentically Japanese. The new left-
hand-drive Corolla on display in the Toyota “Mingalar” dealership in
Yangon, for example, was made in Thailand and is listed at $33,900, over 26
times the country’s national income per person.

One other constituency may also come to regret the altered rules. Many
poorer residents of Yangon, where motorcycles are banned, ride bicycles or
sit in three-wheeled “trishaws”, trundling alongside the kerb. As more of
Myanmar’s drivers shift to the left seat, oncoming traffic will be easier to
spot; but these kerbside pedal pushers will be more exposed than ever.

This article was downloaded by calibre from
https://www.economist.com/news/business/21730908-government-outlawing-right-hand-
drive-cars-many-japanese-made-cars-enjoy-afterlife/print

| Section menu | Main menu |

| Next | Section menu | Main menu | Previous |

The wa forward

Japan Inc gingerly embraces more foreigners

Big firms are putting non-Japanese on their boards

Nov 2nd 2017 | TOKYO

MICHAEL WOODFORD, the first non-Japanese president of Olympus,
likened the camera-maker’s board members who sacked him in 2011 to
“children in a classroom”. Mr Woodford had confronted Tsuyoshi Kikukawa,
the company’s imperious chairman, over a $1.7bn hole in its finances. Mr
Kikukawa responded by orchestrating a show of hands in a boardroom coup
that sent the Englishman packing. It all fitted a cliché of Japan’s boardrooms
as an all-Japanese, all-male club where wizened bosses ruthlessly enforce wa,
or harmony.

Gradually, the serenity is being disrupted. Nearly 15% of companies in the
Nikkei 225 stock index now have at least one non-Japanese on their boards.
That is still less than half the share in Britain’s FTSE 100, but it is up from
12% in 2013 and the trajectory seems set. Japan’s biggest bank, Mitsubishi
UFJ, and Takeda, its largest pharmaceuticals company (which in 2015

appointed its first foreign chief executive, a Frenchman) announced the
appointment of foreign directors this year. Of the ten directors at SoftBank, a
telecoms and internet giant, seven are non-Japanese.

When Japanese firms buy Western competitors, they often absorb foreigners
into their higher echelons. Suntory, a drinks company, put the British chief
executive of Beam, a spirits-maker, onto its board in 2014 when it acquired
the American company. SoftBank’s embrace of foreigners reflects a diverse
portfolio that includes ARM, a British chipmaker, and Sprint, an American
telecoms firm. Greater outside influence over Japanese firms also stems from
more overseas investors, who hold about 30% of Japanese shares, up from
23.5% in 2008.

But more still needs to be done, and quickly, if large Japanese firms are to
maintain global relevance, says George Buckley, an outside director of
Hitachi, a conglomerate. Many boards continue to be rubber-stampers, not
vigilant overseers of the sort that foreigners expect to sit on, agrees William
Saito, a venture capitalist who advises the government. Elderly ex-chairmen
and chief executives often wield considerable power even after retirement.
(And if corporate giants are excluded, the number of foreigners on boards of
listed firms has barely inched up, from 0.6% in 2001 to 0.8% last year.)

Livelier boardrooms might help prod Japan’s risk-averse companies to invest
more of their ¥214trn ($1.9trn) of cash, and boost the economy. Their foreign
operations would also benefit from appointing more non-Japanese as business
heads. In the past the easiest way for Japan’s manufacturers to control
subsidiaries abroad was to send people they knew. That may not work for
services, warns Masahiko Uotani, president of Shiseido, a cosmetics
company. “You need people who can really understand local tastes,” he
counsels.

Unless Japanese business changes its ways, firms risk staying dangerously
out of touch, agrees Christina Ahmadjian, a non-executive director at
Mitsubishi Heavy Industries, another conglomerate. The number of Japanese
companies in the Fortune Global 500, a scorecard for big business, has
dropped from 149 in 1995 to 51. A bit of disharmony can be productive.

This article was downloaded by calibre from
https://www.economist.com/news/business/21730902-big-firms-are-putting-non-japanese-
their-boards-japan-inc-gingerly-embraces-more-foreigners/print

| Section menu | Main menu |

| Next | Section menu | Main menu | Previous |

Qatar Airways

The airline industry’s most outspoken boss goes global

Qatar Airways is forging alliances abroad to circumvent a blockade at home

Nov 2nd 2017

AIRLINE bosses are often household names due to their attention-seeking
behaviour—from the foul-mouthed rants of Michael O’Leary, chief executive
of Ryanair, to the model-flanked antics of Richard Branson of Virgin
Atlantic. But even in an industry filled with characters, Akbar al-Baker,
Qatar Airways’ chief executive, stands out. He is known in the industry for
behaving unpredictably at press conferences and for his colourful attacks on
rival airlines. The word “crap” often comes up, as a description for new jets
from Airbus and Boeing, and also (in a quote from July): “there is no need to
travel on these crap American carriers” on which “you will be served by
grandmothers”.

Mr Baker could do with some allies just now. Since June, Saudi Arabia, the
United Arab Emirates, Bahrain and Egypt have imposed a blockade on Qatar,
banning its flag carrier’s jets from their skies. That has resulted in the

cancellation of over 50 daily flights to these countries, costing the airline a
tenth of its business and $500m in profit this year, calculates Diogenis
Papiomytis of Frost & Sullivan, a consultancy.

A shock on this scale would kill many private-sector airlines. But Qatar
Airways has been fully state-owned since 2013. Analysts think its airline
operations are loss-making, and that they are cross-subsidised by other parts
of the group, including Doha’s airport, hotels and a monopoly on alcohol and
duty-free shopping. That suggests the airline’s main function: to put the tiny
emirate on the world stage.

In 1996 Qatar’s then emir, Sheikh Hamad bin Khalifa al-Thani, put Mr Baker
in charge to transform Qatar Airways from a startup with a few jets into a
global airline. He was previously a civil servant at Qatar’s civil-aviation
regulator. Despite a lack of experience, passenger numbers have risen from
almost nothing to over 32m in 2016; the carrier has come first in Skytrax’s
awards for service quality four times.

Rivals retort that its heavy reliance on state support is what makes it special.
America’s three biggest carriers claim that Qatar Airways has violated a US-

Qatari open-skies treaty by receiving $25.5bn in state subsidies since 2004.
Peter Carter, Delta’s chief legal officer, reckons that the airline’s long-term
plan is to push rivals out of business and raise fares later on. In June the
Qatari carrier said it wanted to buy 10% of shares in American Airlines, but
its chief executive, Doug Parker, fought Mr Baker off, fearing that his bid
was a ploy to force it to lobby in favour of, rather than against, state-backed
Gulf carriers.

Nor does the airline have friends at home in the Gulf, where Emirates and
Etihad, its biggest regional rivals, may be benefiting from the blockade
against Qatar. It is often forgotten, notes Andrew Charlton of Aviation
Advocacy, a Geneva-based consultancy, that the Qatari and Emirati airlines
“care more about competing with each other than against the Americans”.
The damage to Qatar Airways from the blockade is no accident, say former
executives from the two Emirati carriers.

Surrounded by foes in the Middle East, Mr Baker is obliged to make
investments further afield. “It looks like he is plotting Gulf domination
through world domination,” says Mr Charlton. Instead of buying airlines
outright, to feed traffic into a hub—a strategy that led Etihad to lose billions
of dollars when Alitalia and Air Berlin, its two big buys, went bust this
summer—Mr Baker plans to build a network of hub airlines across the world.
Qatar Airways has built a 20% stake in IAG, a group of airlines that flies
100m passengers a year, and a 10% stake in LATAM, Latin America’s
biggest carrier. After being snubbed by American Airlines, in September Mr
Baker bought 49% of Meridiana, an Italian carrier.

He might seem to lack the diplomatic skills for such dealmaking. Most airline
managers, after all, are globe-trotting expats in the mould of Sir Tim Clark,
president of Emirates. Mr Baker is known for a tough management style at
Qatar Airways as well as for abrasive public comments. Yet he is not to be
underestimated. In 2013 Qatar Airways become the first and only Gulf carrier
to join an international airline alliance, oneworld, which includes BA,
American Airlines and LATAM. Executives at some of the other members
say that Mr Baker is in fact much easier to deal with than they expected.

As a former watchdog, he also knows how to handle aviation regulators. In
September he lent aircraft to Britain’s aviation authority to help repatriate

thousands of holidaymakers after the collapse of Monarch Airlines, the
country’s fifth-biggest carrier, and in October Qatar made a deal with the EU
on closer co-operation on regulation and safety. He has also been invited by
India’s government to set up an airline with 100 jets. It is no wonder that
some analysts compare him to an arcade-game mole: hit him hard in one part
of the world, and he soon appears elsewhere.

This article was downloaded by calibre from
https://www.economist.com/news/business/21730904-qatar-airways-forging-alliances-
abroad-circumvent-blockade-home-airline-industrys/print

| Section menu | Main menu |

| Next | Section menu | Main menu | Previous |

Schumpeter

Remember corporate Europe? It wants to be noticed again

Emmanuel Macron is helping revive the grandest idea in European business

Nov 2nd 2017

WHEN Emmanuel Macron first started work as a mergers-and-acquisitions
banker at Rothschild in Paris in 2008, technicians of the trade were not
impressed. “He did not know what EBITDA was,” sniffed a former
colleague, according to the Financial Times (it is a measure of company
profits). Yet Mr Macron had ideas and made things happen, and four years
later persuaded Nestlé to spend $12bn buying Pfizer’s nutrition business.

Now that he is France’s president, Mr Macron is trying to revive the grandest
idea of all in European business: creating continental champions capable of
taking on American and Chinese firms. It is an ambitious mission that will
prove highly frustrating.

Mr Macron laid out his vision at the Sorbonne in Paris in September,
promising a “re-foundation of Europe”, and that he would bolster its

“industrial and monetary power”. The same day Alstom, a French transport
firm, agreed to merge with the transport arm of Siemens, a German rival. The
combination will have $18bn of sales, placing it second only to CRRC, a
Chinese state-run monster that sells locomotives around the world. Joe
Kaeser, Siemens’s boss, spoke of putting “the European idea to work” to
create a “European champion”.

That label sounds corny but it used to make bosses tingle with excitement. A
wave of intra-European deals followed the creation of the single market and
the euro, accounting for 31% of global M&A; activity between 2000 and
2005, according to Dealogic, a data provider. Some were orchestrated by
governments—for example, the creation of EADS, a plane manufacturer
(now Airbus) in 2000. Others were backed by investors—such as Vodafone’s
takeover of Mannesmann in the same year, which created a mobile-phone
giant. But the common thread was that having a huge home market would
give European firms the kind of economies of scale enjoyed by American
companies.

Europe’s long crisis, which began when European bond yields spiked in 2010
(and which, hopefully, ended with Mr Macron’s election in May) paralysed
this urge to consolidate. Pan-European deals were just 12% of global M&A;
last year. Worried about the euro’s stability and enticed by faster growth in
emerging economies, European companies have invested more elsewhere.
Meanwhile, American and Chinese firms have used deals and organic
expansion to get even bigger in their domestic markets.

It is bad enough that Europe does not have any technology giants on the scale
of an Amazon or Alibaba, but these trends mean that even the region’s bog-
standard old-economy firms are relatively small. The median listed European
company is 78% as big as the median American one (these figures are for the
top 500 firms in each geographical area, and use a blend of profits, book
value and market value to measure size, using Bloomberg data). If you
exclude Switzerland and Britain, which have lots of large companies and
which either are not, or soon will not be, in the European Union (EU), the
median EU firm is just 48% of the size of the median American one. Chinese
firms have almost caught up: the median company there is 94% as big as the
median EU firm and within a couple more years will probably be larger.

Europe has a long tail of journeymen in some industries, including banking,
media, defence and carmaking. For example, Peugeot produces one third of
the cars that General Motors does. ProSiebenSat, a German broadcaster, has
sales that are less than a tenth of Disney’s. Ericsson is less than half the size
of Huawei, a Chinese telecoms-equipment firm. Size is not everything. But a
lack of scale, and the costs of operating in lots of midsized countries, may
help explain corporate Europe’s weak return on equity, which at 9% lags
behind America (13%) and China (10%).

With his aim to foster greater scale, Mr Macron should be pushing on an
open door. Profits are rising, making managers bolder, and Chinese and
American predators are sniffing around, giving a sense of urgency. And over
time the EU may try to deepen the single market by harmonising corporate-
tax rates and strengthening its banking union. All this will make pan-
European deals more likely.

Yet there are two stumbling-blocks. First, prickly national sensitivities. The
Alstom-Siemens combination will have a German controlling shareholder but
its headquarters in France. Fingers crossed that this fudge works. Elsewhere,
European unity appears scarce. A proposed $34bn takeover of Abertis, a
Spanish company, by Atlantia, an Italian firm, would create the world’s
largest toll-road operator. But a blocking counter-bid has been made by ACS,
a Spanish firm, with the tacit backing of Spain’s government. Meanwhile,
Vincent Bolloré, a billionaire who controls Vivendi, a French media firm,
wants to create a continental powerhouse and has tried to make inroads into
Italy, buying stakes in Telecom Italia and Mediaset, a media business
controlled by Silvio Berlusconi, a former prime minister. But Mr Bolloré has
run into a wall of regulatory and political hostility.

Pleasing the people, and shareholders too

The other stumbling-block is winning over shareholders. Pan-European deals
are risky. Of the 100 largest bids, 30 have collapsed, often due to political
rows. To justify paying a takeover premium, firms need to cut costs, but this
can be hard for political reasons. The union of Finland’s Nokia and France’s
Alcatel, two telecoms-equipment firms, backed by Mr Macron when he was
finance minister in 2015, has since incurred his wrath by trying to cut jobs in
France. Lax antitrust enforcement has let American firms form oligopolies

and pass the gains to shareholders, not consumers. But European regulators
are, rightly, tougher, so deals that create windfalls for investors are harder to
get approved.

Mr Macron’s instinct is correct. European firms have lost their seat at the top
table of global business. But if the aspiration of creating a new cohort of
European corporate champions is desirable in theory, it is daunting in
practice.

This article was downloaded by calibre from
https://www.economist.com/news/business/21730884-emmanuel-macron-helping-revive-
grandest-idea-european-business-remember-corporate/print

| Section menu | Main menu |

| Next section | Main menu | Previous section |

Finance and economics

23:23]

Global inflation: Gone missing [Thu, 02 Nov 23:23]
Buttonwood: Yielding to temptation [Thu, 02 Nov 23:23]
Anti-money-laundering technology: Washing whiter [Thu, 02 Nov
The Federal Reserve: Powell empowered? [Thu, 02 Nov 23:23]
Household debt in Asia: Mutable values [Thu, 02 Nov 23:23]
Payments in Japan: A yen for plastic [Thu, 02 Nov 23:23]
Trade deals: Jolly good [Thu, 02 Nov 23:23]
Free exchange: Who is my neighbour? [Thu, 02 Nov 23:23]

| Next section | Main menu | Previous section |

| Next | Section menu | Main menu |

Gone missing

As the global economy picks up, inflation is oddly quiescent

But central banks are beginning to raise interest rates anyway

Nov 4th 2017

A FEW years ago, the news about the euro-zone economy was uniformly bad
to the point of tedium. These days, it is the humdrum diet of benign data that
prompts a yawn. Figures this week show that GDP rose by 0.6% in the three
months to the end of September (an annualised rate of 2.4%). The European
Commission’s economic-sentiment index rose to its highest level in almost
17 years. Yet when the European Central Bank’s governing council gathered
on October 26th, it decided to keep interest rates unchanged, at close to zero,
and to extend its bond-buying programme (known as quantitative easing, or
QE) for a further nine months.

The central bank said it would slow down the pace of bond purchases each
month, to €30bn ($35bn) from January. But Mario Draghi, the bank’s boss,
declined to set an end-date for QE. A hefty dose of easy money will be
necessary, he argued, until inflation durably converges on the ECB’s target of

just below 2%. It shows few signs of doing so, despite the economy’s
strength. Underlying, or core, inflation, which excludes the volatile prices of
food and energy, fell from 1.1% to 0.9% in October, according to data
published a few days after the ECB meeting. The euro zone’s miseries of
2010-12 were unique. But in its present, happier state of vigorous activity,
low inflation and easy monetary policy, it is like many other big economies
(see chart).

After a decade of interest rates at record lows, those central banks that are
inclined to tighten policy naturally attract attention. The Bank of England’s
monetary-policy committee raised its benchmark interest rate from 0.25% to
0.5% on November 2nd, the first increase since 2007. On the same day, the
Czech National Bank raised interest rates for the second time this year. The
Federal Reserve kept interest rates unchanged this week, having raised them
in March and June, but a further increase is expected in December.

In Turkey, perhaps the only big economy that is obviously overheating, the
central bank—which has been browbeaten by the president, Recep Tayyip
Erdogan, who believes high interest rates cause inflation—opted on October
26th to keep interest rates on hold. Yet in most biggish economies,
underlying inflation is below target (see chart) and monetary policy is being
relaxed. Brazil’s central bank cut interest rates on October 25th from 8.25%
to 7.5%. Two days later, Russia’s central bank trimmed its main interest rate,
to 8.25%. This week the Bank of Japan voted to keep rates unchanged and to
continue buying assets at a pace of around ¥80trn ($700bn) a year. These
economies are gathering strength. It is a puzzle that, in such circumstances,
global inflation is stubbornly low.

To figure out why, consider the model that modern central banks use to
explain inflation. It has three elements: the price of imports; the public’s
expectations; and capacity pressures (or “slack”) in the domestic economy.
Start with imported inflation, which is determined by the balance of supply
and demand in globally traded goods, such as commodities, as well as shifts
in exchange rates. Commodity prices have picked up smartly from their nadir
in early 2016. The oil price, which fell below $30 a barrel then, has risen
above $60.

This has put upward pressure on headline inflation: in the euro zone it is
1.4%, half a percentage point higher than the core rate. Where inflation is
noticeably high, it is generally in countries, such as Argentina (where it is
24%) or Egypt (32%), that have withdrawn costly price subsidies and whose
currencies have fallen sharply in value, making imported goods dearer. In
Britain, rising import prices linked to a weaker pound have added around
0.75 percentage points to inflation, which is 3%.

A second influence on inflation is the public’s expectations. Businesses will
be more inclined to push up their prices and employees to bid for fatter pay
packets if they believe inflation will rise. How these expectations are formed
is not well understood. The measures that are available are broadly consistent
with the central bank’s inflation target in most rich economies. Japan is
something of an outlier. It has struggled to meet its 2% inflation target in
large part because firms and employees have become conditioned to expect a
lower rate of inflation. Japan’s prime minister, Shinzo Abe, recently called
for companies to raise wages by 3% in next spring’s wage round to kick-start
inflation.

Leave aside the transient effects of import prices, and inflation becomes a
tug-of-war between expectations and a third big influence, the amount of
slack in the economy. The unemployment rate, a measure of labour-market
slack, is the most-used gauge. As the economy approaches full employment,
the scarcity of workers ought to put upward pressure on wages, which
companies then pass on in higher prices. On some measures, Japan’s labour
market is as tight as it has been since the 1970s. America’s jobless rate, at
4.2%, is the lowest for over 16 years. Inflation has nevertheless been
surprisingly weak.

In other words, the trade-off between unemployment and inflation, known as
the Phillips curve, has become less steep. A paper last year by Olivier
Blanchard, of the Peterson Institute for International Economics, found that a
drop in the unemployment rate in America has less than a third as much
power to raise inflation as it did in the mid-1970s.

The central banks that see a need for tighter monetary policy are worried
about diminishing slack. There are tentative signs of stronger pay pressures in
Britain and America, and firm evidence of them in the Czech Republic,
where wage growth is above 7%. Even so, with inflation expectations so
steady, the flatter Phillips curve suggests that the cost for central banks in
higher inflation of delaying interest-rate rises is rather low. The ECB is quite
a way from such considerations. The unemployment rate is falling quickly,
but remains high, at 8.9%. There is still room for the euro-zone economy to
grow quickly without stoking inflation. The dull routine of good news is
likely to continue.

This article was downloaded by calibre from https://www.economist.com/news/finance-
and-economics/21730930-central-banks-are-beginning-raise-interest-rates-anyway-
global/print

| Section menu | Main menu |

| Next | Section menu | Main menu | Previous |

Buttonwood

Investors call the end of the government-bond bull market (again)

It is the corporate-bond market they should worry about

Nov 2nd 2017

FOR the umpteenth time in the past decade, a great turning-point has been
declared in the government-bond market. Bond yields have risen across the

world, including in China, where the yield on the ten-year bond has come
close to 4% for the first time since 2014. The ten-year Treasury-bond yield,
the most important benchmark, has risen from 2.05% in early September to
2.37%, though that is still below its level of early March (see chart).

Investors have been expecting bond yields to rise for a while. A survey by
JPMorgan Chase found that a record 70% of its clients with speculative
accounts had “short” positions in Treasury bonds—ie, betting that prices
would fall and that yields would rise. Meanwhile a poll of global fund
managers by Bank of America Merrill Lynch (BAML) in October found that
a net 85% thought bonds overvalued. In addition, 82% of the managers
expected short-term interest rates to rise over the next 12 months—something
that tends to push bond yields higher.

In part, this reflects greater optimism about the global economy. For the first
time since 2014, America has managed two consecutive quarters of
annualised growth of 3% or more. Forecasts for European growth have also
been revised higher. Commodity prices, including oil, have been rising since
June, which may be a sign of improving demand.

The BAML survey found that, for the first time in six years, more managers
believe in a “Goldilocks” economy (in which growth is strong and inflation is
low) than in a “secular stagnation” outlook (in which both growth and
inflation are below trend). If those views turn out to be correct, then it might
be expected that bond yields would move a bit closer to more “normal”
levels. Until the crisis of 2008, the ten-year Treasury-bond yield had been
above 5% for most of the previous four decades.

Investors also expect that, eventually, some kind of fiscal stimulus will be
passed in Washington, DC. Of the fund managers polled by BAML, 61%
expect tax cuts in the first quarter of next year. Such a package may increase
the deficit and induce more economic growth; both factors would push bond
yields higher.

Another factor behind the upturn in yields is a shift in central-bank policy.
The Federal Reserve has started to wind down its balance-sheet, by not
reinvesting the proceeds when bonds mature. The European Central Bank
will soon cut the amount of bonds it buys every month by half, to €30bn

($35bn). The private sector will have to absorb the bonds that central banks
are no longer purchasing.

Whether this will trigger the long-prophesied collapse of the bull market in
bonds is another matter. Globally, there are no signs of a sustained surge in
inflation (see previous article). PIMCO, a fund-management group, thinks
that global economic conditions may now be “as good as it gets”. The
momentum of growth may already have reached its peak.

Central banks also know that higher bond yields can act as a brake on
economic growth. In G20 advanced economies, the combined debt of
households, governments and the non-financial corporate sector has been
rising steadily and stands at 260% of GDP. Every debt is also a creditor’s
asset, but higher borrowing costs can create awkward adjustments; in
America, for example, 30-year mortgage rates are around half a percentage
point higher than they were a year ago. So the pace of tightening will be very
slow. And if the economy shows any sign of wobbling, central banks will
probably relent.

Perhaps the real area of worry should be the corporate-bond market. Low
government-bond yields have pushed investors in search of a higher income
into taking more risk. American mutual funds now own 30% of the high-
yield bond market, up from less than 20% in 2008. The spread (extra interest
rate over government bonds) on these riskier securities is close to its lowest
level since before the financial crisis. BlackRock, another fund-management
group, says there is “a more favourable environment for issuers at the
expense of lenders”, especially as the quality of the covenants protecting
lenders has been deteriorating.

With the rate of bond defaults falling, and the global economy doing well,
investors probably feel there is little to worry about. But there is a problem:
the corporate-bond market is less liquid than it was before 2007, as banks
have pulled back from their market-making roles. Investors have found it
easy to get into the market in search of higher yields. When the time comes,
they will find it much more difficult to get out.

Economist.com/blogs/buttonwood

This article was downloaded by calibre from https://www.economist.com/news/finance-
and-economics/21730934-it-corporate-bond-market-they-should-worry-about-investors-
call-end/print

| Section menu | Main menu |

| Next | Section menu | Main menu | Previous |

Washing whiter

Increasingly, hunting money-launderers is automated

The business of providing the software is booming

Nov 2nd 2017

KEEN, no doubt, to stay alive, drug traffickers tend to be prompter payers
than most. For software firms, this is just one of many clues that may hint at
the laundering of ill-gotten money. Anti-money-laundering (AML) software,
as it is called, monitors financial transactions and produces lists of the people
most likely to be transferring the proceeds of crime.

Spending on this software is soaring. Celent, a research company, estimates
that financial firms have spent roughly $825m on it so far this year, up from
$675m last year. Technavio, another research firm, reckons the market is
even bigger and will grow at more than 11% annually in coming years. This
is partly because authorities are increasingly quick to punish institutions that
let down their guard. Deutsche Bank, for example, has been hit with fines
worth at least $827m this year alone. Governments, eager to appear tough on
crime, are urging prosecutors to go after not just institutions, but also their

employees.

The number of anti-laundering regulations is climbing yearly—by nearly
10% in America, Canada and the EU, and by roughly 15% in Australia, Hong
Kong, Malaysia and Singapore, says Neil Katkov, a regulatory analyst at
Celent. Even the red-tape-slashing administration of President Donald Trump
is unlikely to cut regulation in this area.

David Stewart, head of anti-money-laundering systems at SAS, a software
giant based in North Carolina, reckons that efforts to abide by such rules now
take from a half to about 70% of most banks’ entire spending on compliance.
A survey this year by Duff & Phelps, an advisory group, found that financial
firms typically spend about 4% of revenue on compliance, a figure expected
to reach 10% in 2022.

Many clues that lead software to block a transaction, or to flag it for a human
to investigate, are straightforward. Round sums are more suspect than jagged
ones. Spikes in transaction volumes and amounts are suspicious. So is cash
deposited in an account via multiple branches. An area’s culture also matters.
Sasi Mudigonda, of Oracle, says its software considers transactions linked to
eastern Ukraine riskier than the west of the country, where Russian influence
is weaker. Even age counts—crooks who move money disproportionately
steal the identities of old people and young adults, says Michael Kent, chief
executive of Azimo, a remittances firm.

Software also hunts for clues that someone on one of hundreds of watch lists
has concocted a fake identity—the giveaway could be the opening of an
account with a password or phone number once used by a corrupt official.
ComplyAdvantage, a firm based in London, licenses software that generates
long lists of suspected criminals by sifting through hundreds of millions of
articles, including those in The Economist, and then determines which
transactions may benefit one of them.

Moving the proceeds of big-ticket crime conventionally involves disguising
them as legitimate trade payments. Software from a Singaporean firm,
AML360, is designed to flag instances of this. Daniel Rogers, the company’s
boss, says it monitors “a jigsaw puzzle” of factors such as ship itineraries, the
locations of commodity producers and fluctuations in their prices. The

software notices if a firm imports expensive stainless steel when a cheaper
source of the material is closer at hand, say, or if an importer’s spending on
copper rises as its price falls.

The next step for AML software is a big leap in the amount and types of data
it crunches. Last year SAS launched Visual Investigator, developed at a cost
of about $1bn. It links financial transactions with text and even imagery in
reams of social media. This could reveal, for example, that a restaurant’s cash
deposits appear too large for the amount of online “buzz” the business
generates; or that a payment recipient skis with a kleptocrat.

With SAS software, rather more than half of flagged transactions lead to the
filing of a suspicious-activity report (SAR) with authorities. Monique Melis,
head of regulatory consulting at Duff & Phelps in London, argues that, to
reduce “false positives” further, regulators should begin systematically to
disclose the SARs that lead to a discovery of crime. Software could then be
better calibrated to withstand a growing problem highlighted by Sophie
Lagouanelle of FircoSoft, a Paris developer of AML technology: savvy
launderers are learning how the software works to slip past it.

Should human analysts fear for their jobs? Probably not. They will still be
needed to follow up on many flagged transactions. Business has not slowed
for Berlin Risk, a German consultancy that discreetly investigates the nature
of a person’s character and earnings by talking to as many as 20 people who
know him. As its senior partner, Carsten Giersch, puts it, “You will never see
a robot interviewing sources.” Or is that the next step?

This article was downloaded by calibre from https://www.economist.com/news/finance-
and-economics/21730928-business-providing-software-booming-increasingly-hunting/print

| Section menu | Main menu |

| Next | Section menu | Main menu | Previous |

Powell empowered?

Jerome Powell is poised to be named chairman of the Fed

By recent standards, Mr Powell would be an unusual pick to lead America’s
central bank

Nov 2nd 2017 | NEW YORK AND WASHINGTON, DC

YOU could forgive Janet Yellen, the chair of the Federal Reserve, for feeling
peeved. With unemployment at just 4.2%, and inflation at 1.6%, she is close
to achieving the Fed’s two goals of curbing joblessness and pinning price
rises at 2%. Ms Yellen is a Democrat appointed by Barack Obama in 2014.
The tenures of past three Fed chairs were all extended by presidents from the
other party. Yet as we went to press, President Donald Trump was expected
to nominate Jerome Powell, a Republican on the Fed’s board, to replace Ms
Yellen.

If picked, Mr Powell—also an Obama appointee—would stand out from
recent incumbents. He would be the first Fed chairman since William Miller,
who left office in 1979, with no formal economics training; and, according to
the Washington Post, the richest since the 1940s.

Mr Powell, who is 64, is a lawyer-turned-banker. His first role in Washington
was at the Treasury during the presidency of George Bush senior. He had
responsibility for financial institutions and helped deal with the collapse of
the Bank of New England, then the third-largest bank failure in American
history.

On leaving government, Mr Powell joined the Carlyle Group, a private-
equity firm, before starting his own business. From 2010 to 2012 he worked
for the Bipartisan Policy Centre, a centrist think-tank. There, he made a name
by warning Republicans about their threats not to raise the limit on
government borrowing.

At the Fed, Mr Powell has occasionally sided with hawks. But recently, his
views on monetary policy have hewed close to Ms Yellen’s. In June he
stressed the need to tighten monetary policy only slowly. He also mounted a
robust defence of the Fed’s loose monetary policy after the financial crisis.
Mr Powell has, however, recently suggested that there is some room to
improve the financial regulations imposed after the crisis.

Critics of the Fed’s recent monetary policy include rivals for the
chairmanship, such as John Taylor, an economist at Stanford University. The
question is whether Mr Trump might appoint hawks like Mr Taylor to other
open seats on the Fed’s board, of which there are three, including that of
vice-chair. One more slot would open should Ms Yellen resign from the
board, as is normal but not required for departing chairs. The balance of the
committee will give a clearer idea of how much a Powell Fed would differ
from the Yellen one.

This article was downloaded by calibre from https://www.economist.com/news/finance-
and-economics/21730927-recent-standards-mr-powell-would-be-unusual-pick-lead-americas-
central/print

| Section menu | Main menu |

| Next | Section menu | Main menu | Previous |

Mutable values

Asian households binge on debt

What should be good news for the global economy has its downsides

Nov 2nd 2017

ONE of the more persistent beliefs about the global economy is that Asians
are more frugal than others. Explanations have drawn on culture (the self-
discipline of Confucianism), history (memories of privation) and public
policy (flimsy social safety-nets forcing people to save). For Lee Kuan Yew,
the founding father of Singapore, and other theorists of “Asian values”, thrift
was one of them. Whatever the true reason, data long supported the basic
claim that Asian households were indeed careful with their cash. But over the
past few years consumers across the region have done their best to prove that
prudence was perhaps just a passing phase.

Household debt in advanced economies has generally declined as a
percentage of GDP since the 2008 global financial crisis, according to the
Bank for International Settlements. In a number of Asian countries, however,
it has been going in the opposite direction (see chart). The biggest increase

has been in China, where households have borrowed about $4.5trn over the
past decade. But Chinese households were starting from an extremely low
base. Relative to income levels, South Korea, Thailand and Malaysia have
reached much loftier heights. Over the same period, consumer borrowing has
also risen in Hong Kong and Singapore.

The increase in debt is, to a certain extent, healthy. An oft-heard criticism of
Asian economies is that, in terms of global growth, they have been punching
below their weight. They produce lots of stuff but rely on profligate
Westerners to buy it. The rise in debt has, so far at least, helped change that
dynamic, fuelling more consumption. Retail spending in Asia, excluding
Japan, has grown by about 10% a year over the past half-decade. Greater
access to credit has made it easier to buy homes, cars and clothes.

But debt can also be dangerous. A recent paper by the IMF observed that, in
the short term, an increase in household borrowing props up economic
growth and keeps unemployment down. After a while, though, these gains
are reversed. The IMF study found that a five-percentage-point increase in
the household debt-to-GDP ratio over three years tends to result in a 1.25-
percentage-point decline in real growth three years in the future. And an
increase of a single percentage point in household debt increases the
likelihood of a banking crisis by a similar percentage.

In Asia financial fragility is not the main worry. Even if households have
been indulging themselves more freely, most regulators have remained
prudent. In South Korea they mandate that mortgages cannot exceed 70% of
a property’s value. Singaporean homebuyers who borrow from banks must
make downpayments of at least 20%—and potentially much more if they
already have outstanding loans. Asian banks are also reluctant to pursue the
kind of subprime lending that made consumer debt so toxic in America a
decade ago.

The bigger risk in Asia is interest rates, says Frederic Neumann, co-head of
Asian economic research at HSBC. He notes that fixed long-term rates are
rare in the region. Most consumer loans have shorter durations, so if central
banks start to increase rates, debt-servicing costs for households will quickly
rise. That will eat into incomes and act as a drag on consumption.

It is already possible to detect headwinds. Mortgage payments in China have
reached about 4.5% of total annual household income, up from 3.6% in 2015,
according to Ernan Cui of Gavekal Dragonomics, a research firm. That, in
turn, is beginning to weigh on consumption. For the government this entails a
trade-off. The increase in mortgages has helped reduce a glut of unsold
homes, which posed a graver danger to the economy than does consumer
debt.

There is also an uglier side to the rise in household borrowing. As in other
parts of the world, unscrupulous lenders prey on the most vulnerable. In
South Korea the share of low-income households struggling under heavy debt
burdens has been creeping up. Choi Pae-kun, an economist at Konkuk
University in Seoul, points out that poorer people may have no choice other
than to borrow to cover living and medical costs. In China online lenders
have been involved in a series of scandals. Some have demanded exorbitant
interest rates and, in a number of cases, forced students to post as collateral
naked selfies, with the threat they could be distributed if dues are not paid.
Debt can undermine Asian values in more ways than one.

This article was downloaded by calibre from https://www.economist.com/news/finance-
and-economics/21730932-what-should-be-good-news-global-economy-has-its-downsides-
asian-households/print

| Section menu | Main menu |

| Next | Section menu | Main menu | Previous |

A yen for plastic

In Japan, the move from cash to plastic goes slowly

A fragmented market imposes costs on retailers and consumers alike

Nov 2nd 2017 | TOKYO

BIC CAMERA, a Japanese electronics retailer, accepts payments in so many
ways that the list nearly obscures the till: credit, debit and pre-paid cards;
mobile wallets; ApplePay and Alipay; and, in some stores since April, bitcoin
too.

Efforts are under way to wean Japan off genkin, or cash. Handling notes and
coins is expensive for businesses; many operate on tight margins because a
persistent lack of inflation has inhibited price rises. The government reckons
more cashless payments could help the economy, too, encouraging people,
including a growing number of tourists, to spend more. (And help it collect
more tax.) Entrepreneurs think the data that come with cashless methods
could promote new business.

Yet cash still dominates. Thank a preponderance of ATMs in ubiquitous

konbini (convenience stores), safe cities where people are happy to carry
wads of cash, and wariness about handing over personal data. Last year cash
accounted for 62% of consumer transactions by value, according to
Euromonitor, a market-research firm. That is down from 65% in 2015, but
compares with just 22% in Britain, 34% in America, 10% in South Korea and
50% in China.

Of the other methods, pre-paid cards are increasingly popular. They covered
12% more transactions by value in 2016 than the year before, despite mainly
being used for payments under ¥3,000 ($26). Retailers small and large, such
as Rakuten, a giant of e-commerce, have launched their own cards. Transport
companies’ cards are widely used, too.

Tsuneharu Miyake, head of financial research at Mizuho Research Institute,
argues that this proliferation of plastic can in large part be attributed to
companies wanting to keep their customers. Most cards offer bonus schemes.
But because they cannot be used in every outlet, this trend means the slow
shift from cash has not brought the convenience and lower costs that were
hoped for. Ryosuke Izumida, author of a book on the future of banking, says
it is a “real hassle” for businesses to have to fork out for hardware for each
system or risk losing customers. Consumers may benefit from this
competition for their custom. But there are drawbacks for them, too. Some
complain that their favoured card is not accepted universally and, says Mr
Miyake, the cost of installing multiple devices is passed on to them.

Meanwhile many businesses still refuse credit cards. That is a problem for
tourists—and for the 2020 Olympics in Tokyo. In McDonald’s fast-food
outlets in Japan, for example, 13 different pre-paid cards are accepted, but not
Visa or MasterCard. (It is planning to change that this winter.)

The fragmentation of the payments market may get worse as Japan continues
to move away from cash. Companies outside the financial sector, such as
social-media apps, may launch payment arms, as Tencent’s WeChat has done
in China. Foreign companies are coming in, too. Some shops accept Alipay, a
Chinese e-payment system that can be used by a retailer who simply
downloads an app. Reports suggest it will launch a Japanese version next
year.

Banks, fearful of losing out to newcomers, are also working on e-payments.
A consortium (including Mr Miyake’s parent company, Mizuho Financial
Group) is developing JCoin, a digital currency. It hopes to have the scale
needed to squeeze others out. If the government is to fulfil its aim of doubling
cashless payments in the next decade, it may have to regulate to curb the use
of cash. Back in Bic Camera, that goal seems a long way off, as customers
rifle through their purses and wallets for hard-copy yen.

This article was downloaded by calibre from https://www.economist.com/news/finance-
and-economics/21730925-fragmented-market-imposes-costs-retailers-and-consumers-alike-
japan/print

| Section menu | Main menu |

| Next | Section menu | Main menu | Previous |

The General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade

October 30th marked the 70th birthday of the WTO’s precursor

Back then, America led multilateralism

Nov 2nd 2017

SUPERLATIVES surrounded the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade
(GATT) when it was signed on October 30th 1947. A press release heralded
it as “the most far-reaching negotiation[s] ever undertaken in the history of
world trade.” The Economist grumbled it was “one of the longest and most
complicated public documents ever issued—and one of the hardest to
comprehend.” The Daily Express, a British newspaper, growled: “The big
bad bargain is sealed.”

The agreement’s complexity matched the tangle of global trade affairs. In the
preceding decades a thicket of protectionism had strangled commerce and
slowed recovery from the Depression of the 1930s. The GATT’s length
matched its scope. It included both tariff cuts and promises to forswear new
duties. Covering 23 countries responsible for 70% of world trade, it came to
embody the rules-based multilateral system.

After 48 years as a provisional arrangement, the GATT has since 1995 been
the World Trade Organisation (WTO). But, 70 years on, some of the GATT’s
original challenges still loom large. The first is the trade-off between
ambition and practicality. In 1947 American negotiators had a grand vision
for a bigger International Trade Organisation, with more members and more
areas of regulation. Eventually that plan collapsed under the weight of its
own ambition. Today, given the challenge of getting consensus among 164
signatories, WTO members are increasingly turning to narrower, plurilateral
agreements.

A second trade-off is between control and co-operation. Today British
Brexiteers want to “take back control” and President Donald Trump thinks
past deals have not put America first. While the GATT was brewing, John
Maynard Keynes, an influential economist, doubted that Britain should spurn
the option of using tariffs to control the level of employment—though he did
accept that the benefits of everyone forgoing tariffs could outweigh the costs.

Some trials are new. Today, as the WTO gears up for its 11th ministerial
conference, American leadership is absent. Instead, the Trump administration
is obsessed with promoting exports. Will Clayton, an American negotiator in
1947, was similarly preoccupied with getting a good deal for American
producers. He proposed walking away from talks with the British after they
refused to give up lower tariffs for their dominions and colonies. But his
political masters stopped him, and compromised. They saw the wider benefits
of the GATT, including its effect on European reconstruction and America’s
geopolitical alliances. They could see that trade deals are about much more
than tariff lines.

This article was downloaded by calibre from https://www.economist.com/news/finance-
and-economics/21730931-back-then-america-led-multilateralism-october-30th-marked-70th-
birthday/print

| Section menu | Main menu |

| Next | Section menu | Main menu | Previous |

Free exchange

Catalonia and the perils of fiscal redistribution

Self-determination is all very well; but what if it masks fiscal selfishness?

Nov 2nd 2017

POPULISM is the weapon not just of the downtrodden. As the crisis in
Catalonia demonstrates, the rich have economic anxieties of their own.
Catalonia has an identity distinct, in important ways, from that of the rest of
Spain. But the recent drive for independence has been energised by anger
over the flow of fiscal redistribution from rich Catalans to their countrymen:
people seen, in parts of the restless north-east, as thankless and lazy as well
as alien. Paradoxically, globalisation has inflamed separatism around the
world by raising the question Catalans now confront: to whom, exactly, do
we owe a sense of social responsibility?

Every country or restive region has its own idiosyncratic history. Yet over the
long run national borders are surprisingly malleable. Some circumstances
offer better prospects for the small and newly independent than others. The
smaller the country, the more easily its government can satisfy its people’s

political preferences. A broadly satisfying compromise is easier among
300,000 people than 300m. But as Alberto Alesina and Enrico Spolaore note
in their book, “The Size of Nations”, smaller countries also face hardships.
They sacrifice economies of scale—they need, for example, to operate their
own state agencies, rather than spread the expense of government across a
larger population. Borders are bound to add to trading costs, leaving countries
with smaller internal markets at an economic disadvantage. At times of
foreign-policy tension, smaller countries, with correspondingly constrained
armies and defence budgets, are easier to bully.

So the world is more likely to sprout new countries when it is relatively
peaceful, and when technology and global co-operation reduce international
barriers to trade. Although moves towards independence in East Timor,
Kosovo and South Sudan were accompanied by appalling bloodshed, it is no
coincidence that over the past half-century the number of sovereign states has
increased in tandem with a decline in global violence and an increase in trade.
For Catalonia’s residents, membership of the Kingdom of Spain brings
sacrifices, like the need to share decision-making on some matters with
millions of other Spaniards. Were Catalonia able to secede from Spain yet
keep its existing trade relationships, leaving would look quite attractive.

Smaller regions’ motives for seeking independence are not always high-
minded. In rich economies, the better-off subsidise the poor through an array
of welfare programmes. That means richer regions support poorer ones
financially. Geographical redistribution is not always a source of tension.
Residents of Massachusetts rarely moan about the flow of their federal-tax
dollars to Mississippi. Wealth divisions that coincide with stark cultural
differences, however, can be more contentious. The financial crisis and its
aftermath, by swelling the ranks of the unemployed (and thus of those
dependent on government help), was ammunition for politicians in regions
keen to cut ties with their national economies. Catalans bridle at the fiscal
drag placed on them by the rest of Spain, but they are not alone; just last
month, Italians in the richer north also voted to demand greater autonomy.

Fearing dismemberment, national governments often use fiscal
decentralisation to reduce separatist pressures. Nationalist sentiment lies
along a spectrum, and giving unhappy regions more say over their taxing and

spending can deflect moderates from a pro-secession stance. Decentralisation
has been a part of Britain’s (so far successful) strategy for managing Scottish
separatism, for example.

Delegating greater authority to regions, however, brings risks. As the
capacity of regional governments grows, citizens might become more
confident in their prospects as truly independent countries. So governments
will sometimes instead tighten the screws on the disgruntled region in order
to limit its ability to govern itself. Madrid has used such tactics at times, most
recently in 2010, when Spain’s right-leaning Popular Party succeeded in
rolling back rights previously granted to Catalonia. Similarly, the EU has said
that seceding regions will have to reapply for membership—implying a
damaging period of economic impairment.

Decentralisation is not a costless concession by the national government. In
the short run, it clearly exacerbates inequality within the affected country,
since fewer resources flow to poorer people and places. Some economists,
like Jason Sorens of Dartmouth College, argue that, over longer periods, by
encouraging regional competition for mobile people and capital,
decentralisation leads to better economic performance. But if rich places tend
to stay rich, because productive firms and people benefit from proximity to
other such firms and people, then decentralisation can create lasting hardship
for poorer places. Rich regions can support high-quality public goods at low
cost because a larger tax base can be tapped to manage fewer of the social ills
associated with poverty. In poorer ones the reverse is true, as more health,
education and other needs must be met from a smaller tax base. It is just that
the alternative—the abrupt, possibly extra-legal secession of the unhappy
region—often looks worse.

Closer and closer

For liberals, it is hard to know how to view separatism. Democratic self-
determination seems a laudable principle. The threat of secession may even
act as a check on the temptation among a poorer majority to saddle a richer
minority with economically stifling levels of taxation. But cultural identity is
a fuzzy, mutable thing. When it becomes an excuse for dodging
responsibilities while enjoying the benefits of open markets, it endangers
both social harmony and openness. The geographical scope of redistribution

will inevitably be limited by popular ideas about who truly belongs within the
national fold. But it is better for everyone if that circle expands over time,
rather than shrinks.

Visit our Free exchange economics blog

This article was downloaded by calibre from https://www.economist.com/news/finance-
and-economics/21730933-self-determination-all-very-well-what-if-it-masks-fiscal/print

| Section menu | Main menu |

| Next section | Main menu | Previous section |

Science and technology

Interstellar travel (I): Rendezvous with Rama [Thu, 02 Nov 23:23]
Interstellar travel (II): Life in the fast lane [Thu, 02 Nov 23:23]
Egyptology: Pyramid selling [Thu, 02 Nov 23:23]
Palaeontology: Mother knows best [Thu, 02 Nov 23:23]
Military drones: Back to the unicopter [Thu, 02 Nov 23:23]

| Next section | Main menu | Previous section |

| Next | Section menu | Main menu |

Astronomy

The first visitor from another solar system has just been spotted

Rendezvous with Rama?

Nov 2nd 2017

AEONS ago, perhaps long before Earth itself existed, a hunk of rock circling
a star somewhere in the Milky Way was thrown out of its orbit so violently
that it was ejected from its natal system. Thus began a journey that would, in
time, take it within an astronomical hair’s breadth of humanity’s home planet.
On October 19th this visitor was spotted by Rob Weryk of the University of
Hawaii in pictures produced by Pan-STARRS 1, a telescope on Haleakala. It
thus became the first interstellar interloper into Earth’s solar system to be
spied by astronomers.

Its origin is clear from its speed. When spotted, it was travelling at 25.5km
per second. That is too fast for it to have a closed, elliptical orbit around the
Sun. Nor could its velocity have been the result of an encounter with a planet
giving it an extra gravitational kick, for it arrived from well above the ecliptic
plane, close to which all the Sun’s planets orbit. Dr Weryk’s object, now
named A/2017 U1 (the “A” stands for asteroid), thus almost certainly arrived
from interstellar space.

Observations from other telescopes have confirmed A/2017 U1’s extrasolar
origins. After swinging around the Sun, as the diagram shows, it passed about
25m km below Earth on October 14th, before speeding back above the
ecliptic plane. It is now heading out of the solar system towards the
constellation of Pegasus, at a speed of 44km per second.

Sci-fi buffs may find this tale familiar. One of the great works of 20th-
century science fiction, “Rendezvous with Rama”, by Arthur C. Clarke, starts
similarly. Rama, as the object in the novel is dubbed, turns out to be an
uncrewed alien spacecraft, 54km long. It, too, arrives from the void, loops
around the Sun, and vanishes into the distance again. Sadly, A/2017 U1 is no
spacecraft. It is a rock about 400 metres across. But it still has an interesting
story to tell.

Hello and goodbye

Models of planet formation suggest that interstellar objects such as A/2017
U1 are likely to be icy rocks known as comets, formed on the periphery of
distant solar systems, rather than dry rocks, known as asteroids, dislodged
from such systems’ interiors, which are places where any comet-like volatiles
will have been driven off by the heat of their parent stars. Indeed, A/2017 U1
was first classified as a comet. But the absence of a tail of gas and dust,
produced when comets fly close to the Sun, and analysis by Alan
Fitzsimmons of Queen’s University in Belfast of sunlight reflected from its
surface, suggest that surface is mostly rock.

One explanation is that over many millennia cosmic rays have transformed
the icy, volatile chemicals that would be expected to stream off a comet into
more stable compounds. Another is that the Sun is not the first star A/2017
U1 has chanced upon, and that the volatile materials have been boiled off by
previous stellar encounters. Or it could be that the object actually was dry to
begin with—perhaps once orbiting its parent star in an equivalent of the solar
system’s asteroid belt and then having been ejected by an encounter with a
Jupiter-like planet.

Another puzzle is why nothing like A/2017 U1 has been seen before.
Theories of planet formation suggest such objects should be a reasonably
common sight. Perhaps the theories are wrong. Or it could be that these

interstellar visitors have been overlooked in the past, and that there will be a
spate of such sightings in future.

The proof that interstellar wanderers like A/2017 U1 really do exist also
touches on the question of how life got going on Earth in the first place.
Though most researchers think it evolved in situ from non-living chemicals, a
few favour the idea that this evolution happened elsewhere and that living
things, in the form of bacteria, were carried to Earth fully formed, inside
objects of this sort.

Whether life could survive such a journey is moot. Outer space has a
temperature close to absolute zero, is full of harmful radiation and is of
course a vacuum. But some forms of life are remarkably resilient, even to
these sorts of extremity. Experiments that may shed some light on the matter
are being planned as part of efforts to send unmanned, miniature space probes
to stars close to the solar system (see article).

As to the rock itself, it surely deserves a more memorable name than the one
it sports at the moment. And a quick look at the list of existing asteroid
names instantly suggests one. Perhaps in expectation of a discovery like this,
the International Astronomical Union, which approves such names officially,
has not yet called an asteroid “Rama”. How about it, chaps?

This article was downloaded by calibre from https://www.economist.com/news/science-
and-technology/21730863-rendezvous-rama-first-visitor-another-solar-system-has-just-
been/print

| Section menu | Main menu |

 
| Next | Section menu | Main menu | Previous |

Worm hole

The first voyager to another star may be a worm or a tardigrade

Life in the fast lane

Nov 2nd 2017 | SANTA BARBARA

SPACE is cold. So, when launching dogs for early space missions, Soviet
rocket scientists chose strays like Laika that had survived on the streets
during Moscow’s freezing winter. Today, in contrast, some researchers
working on an ambitious effort to dispatch craft to Alpha Centauri, the
nearest solar system to Earth’s, see the chill of space not as a hindrance to
sending life from one such system to another, but rather as a way to do just
that.

Alpha Centauri is an attractive target. It is a cluster of three stars and at least
one planet that is only about four light-years away. With money from NASA,
America’s space agency, and others, the Experimental Cosmology Group at
the University of California, Santa Barbara, is designing a system, called
Project Starlight, that proposes to use a powerful laser beam to push fleets of
lightweight spacecraft, each the size of a DVD, to a fifth of the speed of light.

Even at that blistering velocity, though, a journey to Alpha Centauri would
last more than 20 years. And, with a maximum weight of no more than a
small coin, these starchips, as they have been dubbed, could not carry enough
food, oxygen and waste-removal apparatus to keep even minuscule creatures
alive that long. Unless, that is, those creatures could travel in suspended
animation, frozen by the chill of space.

This looks possible. A microscopic nematode worm, Caenorhabditis elegans,
which is much studied and well understood by biologists, can be frozen for
years and yet, within minutes of thawing in a drop of warm water, begin to
squirm, eat and reproduce as if no time had passed.

If people are going to send spacecraft to the nearest stars, then Philip Lubin,
who is in charge of Project Starlight, would like some living creatures to go
along for the ride, Laika-like, to see what happens to them. Dr Lubin’s team
has begun designing miniature chambers in which the frozen worms could
travel, be revived with heat from plutonium, a starchip’s source of power, and
be monitored with tiny cameras and other sensors, data from which would be
beamed back to Earth. Joel Rothman, who is in charge of this part of the
project, which is called Terrestrial Biomes in Space, points out the
advantages for such work that C. elegans possesses.

For a start, the worms are hardy. Some of the specimens in Dr Rothman’s
laboratory have been in suspended animation at -70°C for 33 years. Others
are descendants of animals that orbited Earth as part of Columbia’s last, fatal,
mission, in 2003. Though this space shuttle’s disintegration on re-entry killed
its human crew, the nematodes survived.

On top of this, for a creature composed of fewer than 1,000 cells, C. elegans
can manifest quite complex behaviour. Individuals will, for example, wriggle
toward good smells and away from unpleasant ones. They can, like rats and
pigeons, be trained to turn left (or right) in a maze if that is the path that leads
routinely to food. And such learned behaviours continue even after an animal
has been in suspended animation for decades.

As a backup to C. elegans Dr Rothman’s laboratory is also studying another
group of potential starchip travellers—waterborne micro-animals called
tardigrades (pictured) that, when cold and dehydrated, can withstand

suspended animation for at least a century and perhaps millennia. These
“water bears”, as they are also known, resist radiation as well as temperatures
and pressures, low and high, that would kill nearly all other animals.

The Terrestrial Biomes in Space team thus hopes, if starchips ever do fly, to
learn how years of travel through cosmic cold and radiation, and acceleration
to a significant fraction of the speed of light, affect life. Once awoken near
Alpha Centauri, will the creatures recall behaviour learned on Earth? Will
they reproduce, hatch, grow and die differently from their Earth-bound
counterparts? The answers may help reveal what might happen to bigger
creatures, such as humans, on long star treks.

Some worry about these aims. They fear earthly organisms might
contaminate alien worlds. Catherine Conley, in particular, is critical of the
idea of putting them on starchips, lest they damage another realm. Dr Conley
is the head of NASA’s Planetary Protection Office. In light of her concerns,
and those of others, NASA’s bounty does not extend to paying for the
Terrestrial Biomes in Space side of Project Starlight.

In truth, animals are unlikely to contaminate anything. They have to eat, and
unless their destination is furnished with living creatures made of molecules
more or less identical to those of life on Earth, they will starve. Moreover, if a
starchip did encounter a planet, then its near-luminal impact velocity would
create an explosion with a yield of about a kilotonne, blasting it into plasma
in nanoseconds.

Dr Conley’s fears, however, are not unwarranted in the case of creatures that
do not need to eat other living things—bacteria that can photosynthesise or
extract energy from minerals, for example. Some, indeed, think that life itself
may spread around the universe in this way, on rocks that travel from one star
system to another. Until recently, there has been no sign of such rocks. But
(see previous story) one has just entered the solar system.

This article was downloaded by calibre from https://www.economist.com/news/science-
and-technology/21730862-life-fast-lane-first-voyager-another-star-may-be-worm-or/print

| Section menu | Main menu |

| Next | Section menu | Main menu | Previous |

Egyptology

A new chamber has been detected in the Great Pyramid of Giza

Muons from cosmic rays illuminated it

Nov 4th 2017

ANCIENT Egypt has held the world in thrall for so long that some of those
once enthralled are now ancient history themselves. Well-to-do Romans of
the early Empire, for instance, would tour the place to look at antiquities
older to them than the Colosseum is to a tourist today. Yet Egypt keeps
secrets still. Its royal tombs, both those underground and the skyward-
reaching pyramids, are rife with stories of hidden chambers. And, in the most
famous tomb of all, the Great Pyramid of Giza, one such has just been shown
to be real.

It was discovered by Kunihiro Morishima of Nagoya University, in Japan,
and his colleagues. They searched not by the time-honoured archaeological
techniques of digging with trowels and knocking down walls with hammers,
but by muon tomography—an esoteric way of looking inside things using the
fallout from cosmic rays that have hit Earth’s atmosphere. Muons are heavy

kin to electrons. They are able to penetrate solid matter to some degree, but
are eventually absorbed by it. By measuring the absorption rate of muons
travelling in different directions through a large object, such as a pyramid, it
is possible to work out if there is an empty space within. By suitable
triangulation, it is then possible to work out where that empty space is. And
this, as they describe in a paper in Nature, is what Dr Morishima and his
colleagues have done for the Great Pyramid.

The pyramid itself, the last-standing of the Seven Wonders of the Ancient
World, was built around 2560BC by Khufu, a pharaoh better known in the
West by his Hellenised name, Cheops. Several of its internal chambers,
including the Queen’s chamber, the King’s chamber and the Grand Gallery,
were robbed in antiquity, and excavated more systematically in the 19th and
20th centuries by various archaeologists. But there has always been a
suspicion that, in such a huge pile of stone, more chambers exist—perhaps
unplundered.

To look for such chambers Dr Morishima and his colleagues deployed three
sorts of muon detector in various places in and around the pyramid. One type
were nuclear emulsion films. These are photographic films which capture the
tracks of muons passing through them. The second were scintillator
hodoscopes. These are made of material that gives off light as a muon passes
—again allowing its path to be followed. The third type of instrument,
micropattern gaseous detectors, follow the passage of muons from the trails
of ionised gas they leave behind.

Combining the results of these approaches revealed a void inside the pyramid
some 30 metres long, with about the same volume (800 cubic metres or so) as
the Grand Gallery. Its centre is 40-50 metres north of the Queen’s chamber.
Muon tomography is a low-resolution technique, so the exact shape of this
void—or even whether it is actually several smaller voids in proximity to one
another—remains to be determined. But it is clearly a large space.

How to examine it in more detail also remains to be determined. Drilling into
such an important monument to get at the newly discovered void is out of the
question. Camera probes inserted into shafts within the pyramid that are
unsafe for human entry have found things that may or may not be unopened
doors, but none would debouch directly into the newly discovered space.

Muon tomography is not, at the moment, sensitive enough to see such shafts,
so unknown ones would not have shown up on Dr Morishima’s survey.
Presumably there is, somewhere in the pyramid, a corridor of some sort that
leads to the new void. But that is still on the list of unrevealed Ancient
Egyptian secrets.

This article was downloaded by calibre from https://www.economist.com/news/science-
and-technology/21730864-muons-cosmic-rays-illuminated-it-new-chamber-has-been-
detected-great/print

| Section menu | Main menu |

| Next | Section menu | Main menu | Previous |

Palaeontology

Mammoth society seems to have been like that of modern elephants

Females travelled together. Males lived alone

Nov 2nd 2017

ELEPHANTS live in social groups of up to a dozen, led by a matriarch. At
least, they do if they are not mature males. But once a male becomes sexually
potent, he leaves his native band and sets up shop by himself. The only males
present in these groups are therefore juveniles. This arrangement is common
to all living species of elephant (of which there are either two or three,
depending on which taxonomist you ask). But elephant biologists would like
to know if it was also true of extinct elephant species. And for one of those,
the mammoth, this week sees the publication of data suggesting that it was.

One advantage elephants gain from living together is that the groups are
repositories of information that gets handed down the generations—for
example, what parts of a home range are best avoided, because they are
dangerous. Males may not have time to learn of all these hazards (for
elephants may range over tens of thousands of square kilometres) before they

start living alone. It is no surprise, therefore, that males are much more likely
than females to fall victim to natural traps, such as boiling-hot springs and
sinkholes. If that were also true of mammoths, it would be evidence that they
had a similar social system to that of modern elephants. Patricia Pecnerova
and Love Dalen of the Museum of Natural History in Stockholm, Sweden,
therefore decided to investigate the matter. They have published their results
in Current Biology.

Ms Pecnerova and Dr Dalen knew from past work that some of the best-
preserved mammoths in the world’s fossil collections were thought to have
died in mudflows or fallen into pools where they drowned. Moreover, when
the skeletons of these beasts were studied, their morphology suggested that
almost all of them were male. Paired with studies of fossilised footprints left
behind by mammoths when they walked over soft ground, this evidence
suggested that female mammoths did, indeed, travel in groups with their
young, while adult males were solitary. But, though suggestive, these studies
were not large enough to be compelling. The two researchers therefore
sought to collect further evidence.

They worked with a team of colleagues to examine the remains of as many
mammoths as they could get their hands on. The specimens they looked at
came from river basins, coastlines and lake shores, where they had been
redeposited after being eroded from frozen sediments and then washed
downstream. Though not pristine, these fossils were numerous. In total, the
team obtained the remains of 98 animals.

Rather than guess from the bones what sex their owners had been, Ms
Pecnerova and Dr Dalen turned to DNA analysis. This showed 66 specimens
to be male and 29 to be female (three were unsexable). That clearly suggests
a preservation bias in the fossil record—and, since animals that get buried in
hot springs, marshes, crevasses and sinkholes are much more likely to be
preserved for posterity than those that die in the open air, the data confirm the
inference drawn from the well-preserved specimens, that male mammoths
walked alone, and suffered as a result.

This article was downloaded by calibre from https://www.economist.com/news/science-
and-technology/21730861-females-travelled-together-males-lived-alone-mammoth-society-
seems-have-been/print

| Section menu | Main menu |

| Next | Section menu | Main menu | Previous |

Military drones

The latest unmanned drone is a version of an existing manned one

Back to the unicopter

Nov 2nd 2017

IN THE future, the skies of cities may belong to aerial drones. These are
spiderlike devices with four or more propellers (thus often known as
quadcopters, hexacopters, octocopters and so on) that provide both lift and
thrust. The hope is that autonomous, self-guided versions of these will deliver
anything from pizzas to passengers from door to door without being held up
by terrestrial traffic jams.

Delivering goods, and particularly people, to and from a battlefield is,
though, a bit different. Aircraft have to be hardened against enemy action,
and also need the capacity to transport large payloads. A flying spider is
unlikely to cut the mustard. Instead, Lockheed Martin, the maker of one of
the world’s best-known military helicopters, the Black Hawk, is working on a
drone with those specifications—made from a Black Hawk helicopter.

Turning existing helicopters into drones is not a new idea. Northrop
Grumman’s RQ-8 Fire Scout, used for reconnaissance in Afghanistan by
America’s navy, and now being developed for mine hunting and fighting off
swarms of small boats, is a modification of the Schweizer 330SP light-utility
helicopter. The Kaman K-MAX, a heavy-lifting drone which the country’s
marine corps tested in Afghanistan for delivering cargo, is a modified version
of the Kaman K-1200. A civilian version is now available, for firefighting.
And since 2004 Boeing has been flying an unmanned demonstrator version of
its H-6 Little Bird, a military-reconnaissance helicopter.

All these aircraft, however, are controlled by ground-based pilots.
Lockheed’s intention is to build an autonomous craft—one that can sense and
avoid obstacles and identify safe landing sites without human assistance. The
project, sponsored by DARPA, America’s main military-research agency, is
known as Matrix. So far, Matrix has been used only as a co-pilot. But, if all
goes well, the first helicopter able, in theory, to fly by itself will take off early
next year. Though it will not be put to such a test immediately, the intention
is that Matrix will eventually take over everything.

Matrix includes several sorts of sensor, so the helicopter can see for itself. It
has what Lockheed describes as a supercomputer to interpret input from these
sensors and to make decisions based on that input. It also has servo-
controlled devices which operate the machine’s flight controls.

The main sensor is a form of LIDAR, the laser equivalent of radar. LIDAR is
part of the equipment of driverless cars, but the Matrix version is more
powerful. It can detect objects hundreds of metres away. Also, as Chris Van
Buiten, vice-president of Sikorsky Innovations, the part of Lockheed running
the project, observes, a helicopter must deal with three dimensions, not two,
and is likely to be travelling faster than a car. It may, for instance, be flying at
over 250kph at low level in what he terms “obstacle-rich terrain”, with trees,
power lines and buildings, as well as other aircraft to avoid—not to mention
enemy fire.

Black Hawk up

Mr Van Buiten is cagey about the other sensors Matrix uses, but says they
include various cameras and conventional radars. Presumably, the system

will also have digitised terrain maps that will both assist navigation and
permit it to spot changes in geographical features that may be the result of
enemy activities. As to the flight-controlling servos, these are built into the
aircraft itself. Matrix is not like PIBOT, a humanoid robotic flight-control
system being designed by engineers in South Korea, which sits in an
unmodified pilot’s seat and manipulates unmodified controls.

The sensors’ rapid reactions—milliseconds rather than the two seconds or so
a human pilot takes to assess and respond to an unexpected hazard—should
make the unmanned system safer than such a pilot. It will take time to reach
that level, but Matrix should, almost from the beginning, be able to take the
aircraft over and fly it solo in case of an emergency. If the engine were to fail,
for example, it would scan the ground below for the best landing spot and
touch down there without human assistance. It will also be able to detect
whether the pilot has fallen unconscious and, if so, fly the helicopter safely.

The plan is to expand these sorts of features, moving steadily from assisting
the pilot to flying the aircraft autonomously. And though there are what Mr
Van Buiten calls “gnarly technical problems” to be overcome, he says the
biggest challenge is building trust. Not only passengers, but also pilots and
regulators need to have confidence in the safety of Matrix before it can be
fully autonomised.

Mr Van Buiten cites a precedent for such trust-building—a recovery system
which Lockheed installed in F-16 fighter jets. If an F-16 pilot passes out
during a violent manoeuvre, this automatically brings the aircraft into a
straight and level flight path. That has already prevented several crashes,
shifting pilots’ attitudes from indifference to “I want that on board my
fighter”.

The airframe being used for the first tests is one of the oldest models of Black
Hawk, a UH-60A from 1980. This was chosen to demonstrate the ease with
which an aircraft can be upgraded. Once the modified aircraft is airborne, it
will be a matter of accumulating thousands of hours of reliable operation
while steadily expanding the range of tasks that the automated controls can
carry out unaided in increasingly challenging environments. Then, from
Lockheed’s point of view, it will be ready for testing by the armed forces.

Warfare, however, is not the only potential market for Matrix. Mr Van Buiten
says the technology may also see early use servicing offshore oil and gas
platforms, permitting them to be resupplied in all weather conditions, without
risking pilots. Fortunately for those who find even quadcopters noisy and
irritating, pizza delivery is not on Lockheed’s menu.

This article was downloaded by calibre from https://www.economist.com/news/science-
and-technology/21730865-back-unicopter-latest-unmanned-drone-version-existing-
manned/print

| Section menu | Main menu |

| Next section | Main menu | Previous section |

Books and arts

Literary biography: Restless soul [Thu, 02 Nov 23:23]
Vladimir Putin’s Russia: Degrees and perception [Thu, 02 Nov 23:23]
Writing from Catalonia: Fake man [Thu, 02 Nov 23:23]
Living with gods: Transcendental meditation [Thu, 02 Nov 23:23]
Johnson: We was and it ain’t [Thu, 02 Nov 23:23]

| Next section | Main menu | Previous section |

| Next | Section menu | Main menu |

Restless soul

Joseph Conrad, the first novelist of globalisation

Raised speaking Polish and French, Joseph Conrad didn’t learn English until
he was 21. But he became one of the finest of English writers

Nov 2nd 2017

The Dawn Watch: Joseph Conrad in a Global World. By Maya Jasanoff.
Penguin Press; 400 pages; $30. William Collins; £25.

JOSEPH CONRAD was a phenomenon. Born to Polish parents in 1857 in a
part of the Russian empire that is now Ukraine, he was christened Jozef
Teodor Konrad Korzeniowski. French was his second language, and he did
not come to England (or speak a word of English) until he was 21. Yet such
was his eventual mastery of the language that he has come to be regarded as
one of the greatest writers in English.

In 1948 F.R. Leavis, a well-known literary critic at Cambridge University,
listed him in “The Great Tradition” as being up there with Jane Austen,
George Eliot and Henry James. Eight years later Walter Allen, another critic,

wrote that “Nostromo” was arguably “the greatest novel in English of this
century”. “Heart of Darkness” gained a new audience through “Apocalypse
Now”, Francis Ford Coppola’s epic war film of 1979.

Yet readers today are often deterred by Conrad’s convoluted, prolix style.
This is a pity. Many of his novels and short stories richly reward
perseverance. As Maya Jasanoff, professor of British and imperial history at
Harvard University, argues in a new book that blends history and literary
criticism, Conrad wrote “at the turn of the 20th century” of many of the
global forces and perils that afflict the world today.

The novelist was orphaned at 11, his parents having succumbed to illness
after being exiled for revolutionary activity to “the gates of Siberia”. At 16 he
ran away to sea. For nearly 20 years he worked as an ordinary seaman from
Marseille where, suffering from debt and despair, he appears to have
attempted suicide. Later he became a fully qualified British master mariner,
and travelled the world, particularly the archipelagoes and peninsulas of
South-East Asia, where many of his tales are set. Conrad, Ms Jasanoff writes,
“belonged to the last generation of seafarers who worked primarily on sailing
ships”, which he called “the aristocracy”. In his writings he “transformed the
British sailing ship into a gold standard for moral conduct”.

Sailing to Australia as first mate on the Torrens, he befriended John
Galsworthy, a young lawyer who went on to write “The Forsyte Saga”, which
eventually won him a Nobel prize. Then, in 1894, with no command in view,
Conrad abandoned the sea and published his first novel, “Almayer’s Folly”.
The journey from native-born Pole to sailor to writer was complete. Two
years later, after a short, awkward courtship, he married the seemingly
unsuitable Jessie George, settled contentedly in Kent, fathered two sons and
dedicated the rest of his life to writing.

In “The Dawn Watch” Ms Jasanoff describes her own journeys in search of
Conrad—four weeks on a French cargo ship across the Indian Ocean and a
complicated trip to the Democratic Republic of Congo. She skilfully
integrates details of Conrad’s life and accounts of his four greatest works,
linking the challenges and forces that lie behind and within the novels to
those of the 21st century.

If not as cosmopolitan as today, London in the 1890s contained 50,000
continental Europeans—“more than all the population of Krakow”. (Conrad
might be curious to know that Poles are now the largest foreign-born group in
Britain.) Russian revolutionaries and militant Irish nationalists inspired “The
Secret Agent”, set in a grimy, Dickensian London, an ironic treatment of
plotting and terrorism and a bomb that goes off at the wrong moment, killing
an innocent simpleton. Then, as now, the threats of anarchism and terrorism
fuelled anti-immigrant feeling. As Ms Jasanoff writes: “When you think a
foreigner might take your job, you protest. When you think a foreigner might
kill you, you panic.”

If “The Secret Agent” is told in an easily readable manner, “Lord Jim”, which
had come out seven years earlier, is altogether more exotic and demanding.
Captain Marlow, Conrad’s recurrent narrator, describes how in a moment of
confusion a “powerfully built” young Englishman abandons a ship loaded
with pilgrims that appears to be sinking. Conscience-stricken and haunted,
Jim repeatedly tries to make a new start, but just when he appears to be
prospering he is destroyed. This meandering narrative, Ms Jasanoff writes,
“spoke in a metaphor [that] imperialists could appreciate”, in particular about
the moral uprightness of “the right sort” of Englishman. It was recognised as
having great originality and inspired many younger writers, though not
everyone was convinced. For E.M. Forster, “the secret casket of his genius
contained a vapour rather than a jewel.” But Ms Jasanoff states that “for
Conrad, the vapour was the jewel.”

“Heart of Darkness”, which came out in 1902, two years after “Lord Jim”,
arose from Conrad’s brief and sickening experience of Belgian exploitation
of the then Belgian Congo. He was appalled by the treatment of the Africans
and the ivory trade, as exemplified in the novel by Kurtz, the agent who came
promising civilisation but turned to vile savagery and eventually expired,
uttering the words, “The horror! The horror!”

Conrad expressed similar concerns in the more substantial “Nostromo” of
1904. For the first time he wrote about an imaginary place, the South
American republic of Costaguana, but it was “a novel about every place he’d
been”. It projected all his political cynicism, his nostalgia for a pre-
technological age and his fears for a future dominated by “material interests”.

Ms Jasanoff says she set out to explore Conrad’s world “with the compass of
a historian, the chart of a biographer, and the navigational sextant of a fiction
reader”, and these have served her well. Anthony Powell, a novelist, once
described Conrad as “an enigmatic figure. The more we read about him, the
less we seem to know him.” This biography may not fully reveal the mystery
behind the man, but it is a powerful encouragement to read his books.

This article was downloaded by calibre from https://www.economist.com/news/books-and-
arts/21730850-raised-speaking-polish-and-french-joseph-conrad-didnt-learn-english-
until-he-was-21/print

| Section menu | Main menu |

| Next | Section menu | Main menu | Previous |

Vladimir Putin’s Russia

Masha Gessen is wrong to call Russia a totalitarian state

The distinction between totalitarianism and authoritarianism is not one of
degree, but one of kind

Nov 2nd 2017

The Future is History: How Totalitarianism Reclaimed Russia. By Masha
Gessen. Riverhead Books; 528 pages; $28. Granta; £20.

HANNAH ARENDT, in “The Origins of Totalitarianism”, cautioned against
the glib application of the T-word. The distinction between totalitarianism
and authoritarianism in political theory is not one of degree—with
totalitarianism at the top of an ascending scale of evil—but one of kind.
Totalitarianism combines a system of terror, single-party rule, a centrally
planned economy, command over the army and the media, and an all-
encompassing ideology. Such states exercise total control of their citizens’
lives, whereas authoritarian ones stipulate the observance of certain rules and
allow limited liberty as long as it does not challenge political power. Where
totalitarianism mobilises the people, authoritarianism breeds passivity.

Despite quoting Arendt extensively, Masha Gessen, a Russian-American
journalist, seems not to have taken her warning to heart, arguing in a
provocative new book that totalitarianism has “reclaimed” Vladimir Putin’s
Russia. She effectively demonstrates how Mr Putin restored the Soviet-era
apparatus of police control, renewed state domination of media and the
economy, and resurrected one-party rule. Terror, she claims less
convincingly, may be necessary only to establish a totalitarian foundation,
and can be “maintained by institutions that carry within them the memory of
terror”. She argues that the conservative nationalism of Mr Putin’s third term
has become a powerful ideology.

For all the book’s genuine emotional force, its main argument rings hollow.
Mr Putin’s regime is sinister, as this newspaper has long documented. To say
that he is an autocrat rather than a totalitarian is not to excuse his methods or
misdeeds, but to advocate a clear-eyed assessment of reality.

The insistence on invoking totalitarianism obscures Ms Gessen’s more
insightful observations about how Russians continue to be shaped by the
trauma of the Soviet past. A fluent storyteller, she follows four main
characters and three intellectual heroes from perestroika to the present day,
tracing the sweep of contemporary Russian history through their eyes. This
tactic proves effective for showing how politics, with time, consumed
individuals who had initially been more concerned with their personal lives.
The sample of characters, frustratingly, consists almost entirely of liberals
and intelligentsia types from the elites, yet Ms Gessen ably weaves their lives
into a gripping, if grim, tapestry.

Her narrative climaxes with the annexation of Crimea, the moment that she
identifies as the crystallisation of Russia’s new totalitarianism. “Crimea was
Russia’s ideology,” she writes. “Crimea mobilised the nation.” Although the
annexation, and the noxious cocktail of nationalism, conservatism and
Orthodoxy that went along with it, did consolidate society, any mobilisation
proved illusory. Though many Russians gladly cheer the Kremlin’s wars,
whether in eastern Ukraine or Syria, as seen on the television screen, they
largely do not aspire to become martyrs for the cause. (In fact, the Kremlin
has gone to great lengths to hide news of soldiers’ deaths, in contrast to the
glorification of fallen heroes during the Soviet era.) Faced with a passive

population, the Kremlin now frets about low turnout at pro-forma elections.
The defining features of Russian political life are not mobilisation and
politicisation, but apathy and apoliticism.

Nor is state control quite as total as Ms Gessen makes it seem. Mr Putin has
employed coercion, intimidation and selective political violence, but he has
stopped short of unleashing a bloody reign of terror. The state exudes an
inordinate influence over the economy, yet people are free to consume, earn
and travel in ways unthinkable under Stalin, Hitler or Mao. Civil society,
embattled though it is, can still push back against the country’s radical
Orthodox activists. (Public protests halted recent attempts to transfer the
famed St Isaac’s Cathedral in St Petersburg back to church control.)

Alternative sources of information can be found online. And state control is
not so complete that opposition has become unthinkable—as shown by the
thousands of young people attending the recent rallies of Alexei Navalny, an
anti-corruption campaigner. Even Mr Navalny, who has often faced arrest,
has seen his brother imprisoned in Siberia and nearly lost his eyesight after
being splashed with acid, contends that “despite the curtailing of political and
civil freedoms, the past 25 years have been the freest in Russian history.”

Distinguishing between different types of regimes is important. Language, as
Ms Gessen has argued elsewhere, matters. Sloppy use robs terms of their
meaning. It also shapes perceptions. Ms Gessen, who has a wide following,
has become a respected voice on Russia in the era of Donald Trump. Her
book has been warmly welcomed in an America that is keen to know more
about Mr Putin’s country and inclined to see it as the reincarnation of the Evil
Empire. As the American public and policymakers grapple with the threat
from Russia, they would be wise to seek a fuller picture than this book alone
offers.

This article was downloaded by calibre from https://www.economist.com/news/books-and-
arts/21730854-distinction-between-totalitarianism-and-authoritarianism-not-one-degree-
one/print

| Section menu | Main menu |

| Next | Section menu | Main menu | Previous |

Fake man

Javier Cercas probes Spain’s convoluted history

The unmasking of Eric Marco, a Catalan impostor

Nov 2nd 2017

The Impostor. By Javier Cercas. Translated by Frank Wynne. MacLehose
Press; 432 pages; £20.

AS MINISTERS in Madrid and nationalists in Catalonia swap rival
narratives, events in Spain confirm, as Javier Cercas writes, that “the past is
merely a dimension of the present.” No Spanish writer has probed the
unhealed wounds of the country’s history with more subtlety and rigour than
Mr Cercas. In the wake of his prize-winning book, “Soldiers of Salamis”
(2001) and “The Anatomy of a Moment” (2009), he returns to the Spanish
civil war and its disputed aftermath in another “strange novel-without-
fiction”, as he calls it, a true story that even the most fanciful yarn-spinner
would blush to invent.

Its subject is Enric Marco: an actual person, now close to 100. In the 1980s,

as newly democratic Spain began to recover its public memory of civil war
and dictatorship, this Catalan trade unionist emerged as the charismatic
spokesman for Spanish survivors of deportation to German concentration
camps. In countless talks, Mr Marco brought tragic history to life, bearing
witness to Nazi barbarism. Then, in 2005, a historian unmasked him as an
impostor, “a compulsive, barefaced liar”. Mr Marco had gone to Germany,
but as a volunteer worker, not an inmate. He fabricated his anti-Franco
exploits. Yet, after exposure, the “shameless charlatan” justified his pretence
as a “noble, altruistic lie” that opened younger eyes to the evils of the
Holocaust. Unabashed, this “novelist of himself” continued to “gild his
biography with an epic lustre”.

Mixing dogged research and testy, sparring interviews with the charming
pretender, Mr Cercas scrupulously tracks Mr Marco’s big lie. As an author
who juggles reality and fiction, he interrogates his own attraction to this saga
of deceit: “Perhaps only an impostor could tell the story of an impostor.” As
he peels away the “onion skin” around this “peerless trickster”, does the
narrator also create a saintly fiction of himself as the fearless slayer of
falsehoods? Mr Cercas links Mr Marco’s imposture to the “industry of
memory” in post-Franco Spain, as “the entire country was reinventing itself.”
He shows this contested past, and his interpretations of it, as a play of masks
and myths built around “an enormous collective lie”. No heroic rebel, the
conformist Mr Marco “always sides with the majority”. Indeed, his
“narcissistic and kitsch” hoaxes reveal nothing less than “the true history of
Spain”.

This article was downloaded by calibre from https://www.economist.com/news/books-and-
arts/21730853-unmasking-eric-marco-catalan-impostor-javier-cercas-probes-spains-
convoluted/print

| Section menu | Main menu |

| Next | Section menu | Main menu | Previous |

Transcendental meditation

Neil MacGregor on living with gods

Why humans need a spiritual dimension in their lives

Nov 2nd 2017

THE modern human is by turns intrigued, bewildered, horrified and
enraptured by religion. In a world where many people look to science to
decipher the universe, there is something fascinating, and a bit frightening,
about spiritual systems and codes which have commanded passionate loyalty
among millions of people for millennia, but which are still impenetrable to
outsiders.

It follows that any successful effort to explain or even just describe religion
in broad strokes may be on to a winning streak. With a landmark exhibition, a
BBC radio series and a forthcoming book that will sum up both, the British
Museum and its collaborators are rising to that challenge.

It promises to be far more successful than any attempt to address the subject
in a single medium could be. The project appeals, as most popular forms of

religion do, to the mind, the eye and the ear.

A prime mover in this initiative is Neil MacGregor, the institution’s former
director whose didactic skills as a lecturer and broadcaster have already
redefined the role of great museums. It follows on from “A History of the
World in 100 Objects”, his groundbreaking 20-week-long series of radio
stories that went out in 2010. Now the BBC has started transmitting his
reflections on religious culture in 30 new radio talks of 15 minutes each. The
talks draw in part on “Living with Gods”, an exhibition at the British
Museum that uses objects to portray the transcendent as it has been conceived
throughout human history.

The oldest item, and the subject of Mr MacGregor’s opening talk, is a
mammoth-tusk sculpture called the Lion Man dating back to the Ice Age.
Even among hunter-gatherers who were struggling to survive, it was
worthwhile for someone to spend up to 400 hours fashioning an object that
served nothing but a talismanic purpose, connecting people to invisible
worlds. The newest object is a cross made by an Italian carpenter from bits of
a ship that was carrying refugees when it foundered in the Mediterranean near
Lampedusa (pictured). As part of his broadcast, Mr MacGregor goes to the
cave where the Lion Man was found and talks to a German scholar. With a
remit to travel wherever he needs and speak to anyone who can help, his
enquiries take him to, among other places, the Ganges river in India and the
Stone Age tomb of Newgrange in Ireland.

Listeners are invited to follow his wanderings, to take jumps between
cultures and historical eras and even to leap between the here-and-now and
the transcendent. In the same few minutes, Mr MacGregor describes a coat
made from seal-gut by the Yupik people of Alaska and a figure of Osiris, an
Egyptian deity that is connected with life, death and the underworld. The coat
speaks of indigenous hunters’ sacramental relationship with their prey, the
Osiris figure of the new life engendered by the Nile.

It takes a deft communicator to pull off such verbal pirouettes. What holds
the material together, though, is Mr MacGregor’s interest in the role of
religion and ritual in human society. He speaks compellingly of the human
mind’s need to find patterns in the universe and to situate itself within those
giant matrices.

Jill Cook, who curated an important show at the British Museum in 2013 that
explained how the Ice Age made the modern mind, is also the curator of this
new exhibition. She shares Mr MacGregor’s desire to present religion as a
social phenomenon that has been present in every age of history, cementing
and expressing social bonds, and also violently dividing people. By including
exhibits related to the communist cult of atheism, she shows that attempts to
squeeze religion out of society have sometimes dramatically misfired: anti-
religion can easily become a cult.

Mr MacGregor is a social anthropologist on a vast plane, whereas Ms Cook
leans more to the neuroscience of religion. By including sounds, such as
softly heard bells and flutes, she draws attention to the aural stimuli that can
arouse people’s spiritual antennae.

However, they have a common purpose: to bring home the ubiquity, and the
social character, of religion to a mainly secular public. To the modern mind,
speculating about moral and philosophical questions is something people
engage in individually. In most eras of history, and in many parts of the
world today, such freedom would be inconceivable.

As the exhibition and the radio series both proclaim, religion has generally
been an activity, not a set of true-or-false propositions, and above all a
collective activity in which the tribe or nation finds meaning.

Some of the objects that are highlighted have been considered sacred in
themselves, such as a copy of the Kazan icon of the Mother of God. This
depiction of Mary, deemed to have played a role in protecting Moscow from
foreign invaders, is credited with such holiness that it can extend to
reproductions. Others are spectacular reminders of what has been considered
holy, and the efforts which have been made to convey sanctity from one
place to another. For example, the radio series ponders giant silver vessels in
which a Victorian-era maharajah brought water from the Ganges to London,
and the exhibition includes a more modest receptacle in which pilgrims to
Mecca gathered water from a sacred spring and brought it to their families.

Mr MacGregor and Ms Cook do justice to these marvellous objects, at the
same time driving home the point that humans are “hard-wired” for religion,
a concept they both use. But that well-made point leads on to another one.

Whatever sociologists may say about football as a cult, many people alive
today are not religious in the way their forebears were. The hard-wiring
seems to have been loosened, even among those who formally adhere to a
faith. For anyone interested in the broad sweep of human history, that too is
something rather mysterious.

This article was downloaded by calibre from https://www.economist.com/news/books-and-
arts/21730852-why-humans-need-spiritual-dimension-their-lives-neil-macgregor-living-
gods/print

| Section menu | Main menu |

| Next | Section menu | Main menu | Previous |

Johnson

The importance of proper and improper English

What not speaking proper English teaches you about language—and about
life

Nov 2nd 2017

“LET’S talk properly.” Tom Sherrington had little reason to think that his
blog post, so titled, would cause controversy. A British consultant and former
head teacher, he had called on educators to work harder at getting their
students to stop saying things like “We done lots of great activities” and “I
ain’t done nothing.” He recycled the blog post recently on Twitter—to a
fierce and (to him) surprising backlash from linguists.

Led by Rob Drummond, a linguist at Manchester Metropolitan University,
and joined by Oliver Kamm, a journalist at the Times, critics focused in
particular on the word “properly”, along with related words like “correct”.
The ding-dong perfectly encapsulates the way academic linguists (especially
sociolinguists, who focus on things like class) see standard English, and how
teachers do.

The biggest misunderstanding is about the nature of dialects, especially urban
ones. (Country dialects get a pass, for being quaint.) Teachers see “I ain’t
done nothing” as simply wrong. But linguists have found that dialects are
rule-governed, coherent and fully expressive, and have written extensive
grammars of them. They sound “broken” only to outsiders who don’t know
their rules.

The debate, of course, also has a political dimension. The London teens who
say “We done lots of great activities” are likely to have other social strikes
against them, especially being poor or non-white, with parents who
themselves are not highly educated. Poverty and lack of formal education are
behind the mistaken belief that these dialects themselves are somehow
defective. If the people who speak them are poor, goes the faulty reasoning,
their impoverished and fractured language must be part of what holds them
back.

In a long follow-up, Mr Sherrington reframed “proper” as “appropriate”:
children must speak and write the correct variety of English for school. For
their part, Mr Drummond and Mr Kamm agree that of course “standard
English” exists, that it is valuable and that children need to learn it—poor
children most of all. All sides agree that although it can be spoken with any
accent, it does not permit “I done” or “he ain’t”.

What is at issue is how to teach the standard kind of English to children who
speak something else at home. For the sociolinguists, there certainly is a
place for dialect, even if it ain’t in the job interview or the lecture hall. All
language varieties are valuable to their speakers; they give a sense of
community and belonging. For a child to come to school and be told that how
he speaks and how his parents speak is embarrassing—something he must
abandon—is more likely to make him think school is not for him than it is to
get him hitting the books trying to learn to speak like Henry Higgins in
Shaw’s “Pygmalion” (“My Fair Lady” on the big screen). As in that story,
contempt for other people’s speech only tends to drive them away.

But a change of mentality can remove a lot of the tension in the debate. All
children in Britain and America do need standard English. But they do not
need it all the time. Indeed, there is absolutely no need for them to abandon
their home speech; people are perfectly able to switch speech varieties.

Watch the many talented black American comedians, from Richard Pyror to
Eddie Murphy to the duo of Keegan-Michael Key and Jordan Peele, whose
effortless swapping between a buttoned-up English and black vernacular is
played for laughs. For plenty of people this is a survival skill, one that
deserves respect. Fortunately, it can also be taught.

The core of doing so is recognising how language varies naturally by
occasion. Both teachers and students should be taught to think about this
variation with curiosity. If both dialects and the standard are valuable, what is
interesting is just when, and how, people switch between them. Children can
learn to recognise the differences, and even translate from one to the other.
One classic study in Chicago of “contrastive analysis”—essentially of black
students trained to translate their native “we was” into the standard “we
were”—found a 59% reduction in the usage of the “we was” style. (A control
group drilled in traditional methods showed a slight increase.) The group
with contrastive analysis not only discovered something about English. In
learning to navigate race, class and the importance of the right words at the
right time, they also learned something deeper about the world where they
will grow up to use it.

This article was downloaded by calibre from https://www.economist.com/news/books-and-
arts/21730851-what-not-speaking-proper-english-teaches-you-about-languageand-about-
life-importance/print

| Section menu | Main menu |

| Next section | Main menu | Previous section |

Obituary

Fats Domino: On Rampart and Canal [Thu, 02 Nov 23:23]

| Next section | Main menu | Previous section |

| Next | Section menu | Main menu |

On Rampart and Canal

Fats Domino died on October 24th

The rock ’n’ roll pioneer was 89

Nov 2nd 2017

THE fact that Fats Domino in 1957 played 355 shows in America, travelling
13,000 miles, was misleading. He never left New Orleans, or rather New
Orleans never left him. The fact that he was praised by Elvis Presley as the
real king of rock ’n’ roll, named as chief inspiration by Paul McCartney, Led
Zeppelin, John Lennon and Neil Young, and hailed as the man who started a
cultural revolution deemed so dangerous, in some parts of America, that
bottles flew and fights started, was pretty mystifying to him. When the rage
took off in the early 1950s, he had been playing that music in the honky-
tonks and bars of the Big Easy for fully 15 years.

He was New Awlins through and through, beginning with his girth and the
rolling, languid gait it gave him. Both showed such a love of red beans,
gumbo and jambalaya that he couldn’t find food worth eating anywhere else,
but took his own pots, pans and hot sauce to cook them up wherever he was.
One of his stunts was to play standing and, with his belly, gradually push his

piano into the wings. At 21, when he was playing at the Hideaway Club on
Desire Street for $3 a week, he already weighed 200lb. His first big hit, cut in
1949 after Dave Bartholemew, a talent scout, had discovered him, was “The
Fat Man”. But fat men had fun. All the Creole girls loved him, he sang, on
Rampart and Canal. And together “women and a bad life/They’re carryin’
this soul away.”

There was never any question of leaving. He was born in the Lower Ninth
Ward, the youngest of eight children of Creole labourers, and would have
stayed put there if Hurricane Katrina in 2005 had not destroyed his house.
The house got fancier with his success, but he had no wish to move with the
well-to-do. He was satisfied to stay where he had first heard radio songs and
copied them for hours on the family’s beaten old upright; on the same streets
where, once rid of school, he delivered ice to the people without refrigerators,
stopping in their houses, if they had pianos, and practising again. He had a
good ear for catching notes, he felt then. He never dreamed of much more.

It happened because of the way he sang and played, so full of joy that
everyone just had to dance. Once he started those big fingers diving flat and
fast to the keys and that right leg stamping to the beat, once he beamed that
thousand-watt smile to the audience on every phrase, no one could stay still.
What he thought he was playing was rhythm and blues, though there was not
much blue about it: only he, on “Ain’t That a Shame”, could make “my tears
fell like rain” sound like the best thing that had happened all week. But that
R&B; was also saturated with his home town, from the romping, rolling,
accelerating beat to flavours of Mardi Gras bands, Cajun chank-a-chank,
Latin rhythms and his own patois. He added his special groove, right-hand
triplets on every beat, a hook white folks seemed to like; the drummer gave
the back-beat, the horns made bass riffs, and out of that rich pot au feu rock
’n’ roll somehow emerged. Between 1950 and 1963 he had more hits than
Chuck Berry, Little Richard and Buddy Holly combined.

His songs were not often original. Even “Blueberry Hill”, his biggest hit,
which sold 5m copies, had been done before by Louis Armstrong. But he
thought they would fit him fine, so he sang them in his own style. As he
borrowed, so he was borrowed from; it didn’t matter to him, even when white
crooners in those segregated times covered his songs and sold more of them.

Rock ’n’ roll was the first music that crossed from black to white worlds,
from the “race” Billboard chart to the pop one, but he was no civil-rights
campaigner. He let others do that, far too shy to speak out much. (“If you
’scuse me, I’ll just go back to practisin’, OK?”) He stuck to what he did best,
music that made people happy.

It made him happy, too. He could now buy two Cadillacs and a Rolls-Royce
in one afternoon, and enough jewellery to light up a stage: a star-shaped
diamond watch bigger than a silver dollar, diamond clips for his silk ties and
chunky gold-and-diamond rings for every finger. He travelled with 30 suits
and 200 pairs of shoes, especially fancy two-tones to thump the beat. His
only long spells out of New Orleans were spent in Las Vegas, where he
wasted $2m on the slots before he was cured. He could have saved it for his
wife and his eight children, but whatever went up had to come down some
way. He still had more than enough. As he sang on his favourite disc, “Blue
Monday” (referring, though, to Saturday), “Got my money and my
honey/And I’m out on the stand to play.”

Red-bean stew

After 1963 the hits dried up, eclipsed by Beatlemania. He kept performing for
decades, though, buoyed up by the homage of those who stormed past him.
High honours came, and he sometimes left New Orleans to fetch them, but
not often. In his clubhouse annexe in the Lower Ninth, next to his house with
his name in lights outside and marble and chandeliers inside, he would cook
up red-bean stew for the neighbours, then invite them in to eat, have a few
little beers and watch a Saints game. When Katrina trashed it all, including 20
gold discs and his grand pianos, “I ain’t missed nothing, to tell you the truth.”
It sounded like another Fats number, to be sung on a cloud of joy.

This article was downloaded by calibre from
https://www.economist.com/news/obituary/21730848-rock-n-roll-pioneer-was-89-fats-
domino-died-october-24th/print

| Section menu | Main menu |

| Main menu | Previous section |

Economic and financial indicators

Output, prices and jobs [Thu, 02 Nov 23:23]
Trade, exchange rates, budget balances and interest rates
The Economist commodity-price index [Thu, 02 Nov 23:23]

[Thu, 02 Nov 23:23]

Doing business [Thu, 02 Nov 23:23]
Markets [Thu, 02 Nov 23:23]

| Main menu | Previous section |

| Next | Section menu | Main menu |

Output, prices and jobs
Nov 4th 2017

This article was downloaded by calibre from https://www.economist.com/news/economic-
and-financial-indicators/21730872-output-prices-and-jobs/print

| Section menu | Main menu |

| Next | Section menu | Main menu | Previous |

Trade, exchange rates, budget balances and interest rates
Nov 4th 2017

This article was downloaded by calibre from https://www.economist.com/news/economic-
and-financial-indicators/21730858-trade-exchange-rates-budget-balances-and-interest-
rates/print

| Section menu | Main menu |

| Next | Section menu | Main menu | Previous |

The Economist commodity-price index
Nov 4th 2017

This article was downloaded by calibre from https://www.economist.com/news/economic-
and-financial-indicators/21730857-economist-commodity-price-index/print

| Section menu | Main menu |

| Next | Section menu | Main menu | Previous |

Doing business
Nov 4th 2017

The World Bank calculates that in the 12 months to June 2017, 119 countries
implemented at least one positive reform to make it easier for entrepreneurs
to do business. In all, 264 regulatory reforms were carried out. The greatest
number of reforms were designed to help people start a business and get
credit. Asian countries have been particularly busy: Brunei, India and
Thailand each implemented eight reforms. Among other things, Brunei and
Thailand both strengthened the rights of borrowers and creditors by
introducing new secured-transaction laws; India reduced border-compliance
costs. Rwanda has implemented the most business-friendly reforms over the
past 15 years: 52 in all.

This article was downloaded by calibre from https://www.economist.com/news/economic-
and-financial-indicators/21730856-doing-business/print

| Section menu | Main menu |

| Next | Section menu | Main menu | Previous |

Markets
Nov 4th 2017

This article was downloaded by calibre from https://www.economist.com/news/economic-
and-financial-indicators/21730859-markets/print

| Section menu | Main menu |

