Merkel’s unfinished business

Spy-fi: a peculiarly British genre

Making sense of China’s capacity cuts

The Dreamers’ nightmare

SEPTEMBER 9TH– 15TH 2017

Nowhere to hide

What machines can tell from your face

Z E N I T H , T H E F U T U R E O F SW I S S W ATC HM A K I N G

DEFY I El Primero 21
1/100th of a second chronograph

w w w . z e n i t h - w a t c h e s . c o m

Contents

The Economist September 9th 2017 3

5 The world this week

Leaders
7 Facial recognition

Nowhere to hide

8 Germany’s election

Angela’s unﬁnished
business

9 North Korea

Messaging the shooter

9 Amer ica’s Dreamers

Let them stay

10 China’s economy

Created destruction

11 The Rohingyas

Going along with a pogrom

Letters
12 On political Islam, Say’s
Law, better buildings,
Thailand’s minor ities and
headline-wr iting

Br ieﬁng
15 Angela Merkel

The livin’ is easy

Asia
19 South Korea

The nuclear options

20 North Korea’s nukes

Almost there

21 The Rohingyas

Scorched ear th

21 Politics in Cambodia

Closing time

22 Bangladesh v Pakistan

East over takes west

24 Banyan

Pakistan and China

China
25 The party congress

Xi Jinping’s big test

26 Bookshops

Turning trendy

United States
27 Immigration politics

A dream deferred

28 Tax reform

Holiday nightmare

29 Think-tanks

It’s conﬂicated

29 Richard Posner

Gavel down

30 Alaskan detr itus

A load of rubbish

31 Campus life

Blue on blue

32 Lexington

Indispensable, in trouble

The Amer icas
33 Colombia’s peace process

Joining the par ty

34 The Canadian-Amer ican
border

Delay, delay, delay

34 The big one hits

Hurr icane Irma

34 Argentine disappearances

Where is Santiago
Maldonado?

36 Bello

Rebuilding the radical
centre

Middle East and Afr ica
37 Kenyan politics

The rematch

38 Liber ian schools

Classroom exper iments

38 The Seychelles

Debt relief for dolphins

40 South Afr ican politics

Getting nasty

40 Mediterranean migrants

Stuck on shore

41 The last Jews of Egypt

Out of the shadows

42 Saudi foreign policy

Sunnis and Shias: enemies
no more?

42 The crumbling caliphate

Islamic State loses again

Europe
43 Germany’s Social
Democrats

Agenda 2021

44 Italy’s economy

Salute!

44 Torture in Turkey

Bruised and battered

45 Turkish histor y

Recalling Manziker t

46 Charlemagne

Exorcising French demons

On the cover
Facial recognition is not just
another technology. It will
change society: leader, page
7. Ever better and cheaper,
the technology is spreading
quickly, page 53. How
artiﬁcial intelligence is used
to spot signs of sexuality,
page 67. Researchers
produce images of people’s
faces from their genomes,
page 68

The Economist online

Daily analysis and opinion to
supplement the pr int edition, plus
audio and video, and a daily char t
Economist.com
E-mail: newsletters and
mobile edition
Economist.com/email
Pr int edition: available online by
7pm London time each Thursday
Economist.com/pr int
Audio edition: available online 
to download each Fr iday
Economist.com/audioedition

Volume 424 Number 9057

Published since September 1843

to take par t in "a severe contest between 
intelligence, which presses forward, and 
an unwor thy, timid ignorance obstructing 
our progress."

Editorial oﬃces in London and also:

Beijing, Berlin, Brussels, Cairo, Chicago, Madr id,
Mexico City, Moscow, Mumbai, Nairobi, New Delhi,
New York, Par is, San Francisco, São Paulo, Seoul,
Shanghai, Singapore, Tokyo, Washington DC

Angela Merkel Germany’s

chancellor must become bolder
in her (almost inevitable)
four th term: leader, page 8.
She is changing, and not
changing, Germany, page 15.
The struggling Social
Democrats are already looking
to the next election, page 43

Amer ican immigration

Donald Trump is r ight: Congress
should pass legislation that
allows people who moved to
Amer ica illegally as children to
stay: leader, page 9. Mr Trump
ends a controversial Obama-era
programme, leaving the fate of
undocumented immigrants
with Congress, page 27

North Korea Deterr ing a

nuclear-armed Nor th Korea
requires clar ity and
consistency from Amer ica’s
government: leader, page 9.
South Koreans want to bolster
their own militar y capabilities
in response to the Nor th’s
nuclear test, page 19

1

Contents continues overleaf

4 Contents

The Economist September 9th 2017

Br itain
47 The economy

Keeping calm, carr ying on

48 North Sea oil

Wreck and roll

49 Bagehot

Spies like us

International
51 Financial inclusion

Underser ved and
overlooked

Business
53 Visual computing

Facial-industr ial complex

54 Toys

Fidget revolution

55 The aerospace industr y

Dogﬁght in the skies

55 The electr icity industr y

HEMP-induced anxiety

56 India and textiles

Hanging by a thread

56 Loyalty schemes

Forsake all others

57 Mainland microbrews

All the beer in China

57 Electr ic cars

Charge of the batter y
br igade

Finance and economics
59 Chinese industr y

Great Leap Backward

60 Buttonwood

Nor th Korea

61 Flood insurance

Under water

62 Impact investing

Of humanitar ian bondage

62 Currency markets

Fear and favour

63 Wells Fargo

Stick in the mud

64 Free exchange

Government debt

Science and technology
67 Facial technology (1)

Keeping a straight face

68 Facial technology (2)

In the genes

69 Fish farming

Feeding-time worr ies

70 Astronomy

Cassini’s end

Books and arts
71 John le Carré

Smiley’s back

72 Asia’s reckoning

Brothers in arms

72 Sport (1)

On your marks, get tech

73 Johnson

Google a hoover

74 Sport (2)

Help for heroes

74 Ir ish ﬁction

”Solar Bones”

76 Economic and ﬁnancial
indicators

Statistics on 42 economies,
plus our monthly poll of
forecasters

Obituar y
78 Richard Gregor y

Barbed humour

China’s capacity cuts

Investors have faith that
China is dealing with its
industr ial overcapacity. They
should look more closely:
leader, page 10. Capacity cuts
fuel a commodity rally and a
debate, page 59

Rohingyas The Burmese
government must at least tr y
to stop the army’s attacks on
the Rohingya minor ity: leader,
page 11. A massacre in
Myanmar’s Rakhine state
tr iggers an exodus of refugees
to Bangladesh, page 21

Financial inclusion In r ich

countr ies, just as in
developing ones, digital
technology could make
ﬁnancial struggles easier to
manage. Its potential has
scarcely been tapped, page 51

Spy novels To understand
Br itain, read its spy novels:
Bagehot, page 49. George
Smiley, in perhaps his ﬁnal
venture, is as enigmatic as
ever, page 71

Subscription service

For our full range of subscription offers, 
including digital only or print and digital 
combined visit
Economist.com/offers
You can subscribe or renew your subscription 
by mail, telephone or fax at the details below:
Telephone: +65 6534 5166 
Facsimile: +65 6534 5066
Web: 
Economist.com/offers
E-mail: 
Post: 

Asia@subscriptions.economist.com

The Economist 
Subscription Centre,
Tanjong Pagar Post Office
PO Box 671
Singapore 910817 

Subscription for 1 year (51 issues)Print only

Australia 
China 
Hong Kong & Macau 
India 
Japan 
Korea 
Malaysia 
New Zealand 
Singapore & Brunei 
Taiwan 
Thailand 
Other countries 

A$465
CNY 2,300
HK$2,300
 10,000
Yen 44,300
KRW 375,000
RM 780
NZ$530
S$425
NT$9,000
US$300
Contact us as above

Pr incipal commercial oﬃces:

The Adelphi Building, 1-11 John Adam Street,

London WC2N 6HT

Tel: +44 (0) 20 7830 7000
Rue de l’Athénée 32
1206 Geneva, Switzerland
Tel: +41 22 566 2470 
750 3rd Avenue, 5th Floor, New York, NY 10017 
Tel: +1 212 541 0500 
1301 Cityplaza Four,
12 Taikoo Wan Road, Taikoo Shing, Hong Kong
Tel: +852 2585 3888

Other commercial oﬃces:

Chicago, Dubai, Frankfur t, Los Angeles,
Par is, San Francisco and Singapore 

PEFC certiﬁed
This copy of The Economist
is pr inted on paper sourced
from sustainably managed
forests, recycled and controlled
sources cer tiﬁed by PEFC
www.pefc.org

PEFC/01-31-162

© 2017 The Economist Newspaper Limited. All r ights reser ved. Neither this publication nor any par t of it may be reproduced, stored in a retr ieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or
otherwise, without the pr ior permission of The Economist Newspaper Limited. Published ever y week, except for a year-end double issue, by The Economist Newspaper Limited. The Economist is a registered trademark of The Economist Newspaper Limited.
Publisher: The Economist. Pr inted by Times Pr inters (in Singapore).
M.C.I. (P) No.057/09/2017 PPS 677/11/2012(022861)

 
 
 
 
The world this week

The Economist September 9th 2017 5

Politics

North Korea tested a nuclear
device about eight times more
powerful than the one it tested
a year ago. President Donald
Trump responded by criticis-
ing South Korea almost as
much as the North, for seeking
talks with its northern neigh-
bour. America is pushing to
tighten already stringent sanc-
tions on North Korea.

Over 150,000 Rohingyas, a
Muslim minority group in
Myanmar, ﬂed into Bangla-
desh after the Burmese army
went on the rampage, shooting
villagers and burning homes
in response to attacks on police
posts by Rohingya militants.
The UN urged Myanmar’s
government to protect civil-
ians “without discrimination”.

Police in Cambodia arrested
Kem Sokha, the leader of the
main opposition party, on
spurious charges of treason.
The Cambodian government
appears to be stiﬂing all dis-
sent in the run-up to next
year’s elections.

Australia’s High Court ruled
that the government could
hold a non-binding postal
referendum on legalising gay
marriage. Critics say the ballot
is superﬂuous and that parlia-
ment should simply vote on
the matter. 

North Korea’s nuclear explo-
sion overshadowed a meeting
in China of leaders of BRICS
countries: Brazil, Russia, India,
China and South Africa. The
participants issued a statement
condemning the test and
expressing “deep concern”.
The gathering underlined signs
of an easing of tensions be-
tween China and India, which

until a few days earlier had
been involved in a standoﬀ
near their border. 

State-controlled media in
China reported that facial-
recognition technology had
been used to catch 25 criminal
suspects at a beer festival in the
coastal city of Qingdao. Visi-
tors’ faces were scanned at
entrances and matched with
police records. One of those
caught had been on the run for
a decade. Dozens of other
people with criminal records
were also spotted by the cam-
eras and denied entry. 

The face of migration

The French minister of foreign
aﬀairs appointed an “ambassa-
dor for migration”, who will
foster co-operation with mi-
grants’ countries of origin and
of transit. France’s president,
Emmanuel Macron, an-
nounced plans for a new mi-
gration law in 2018. 

The European Court of Justice
dismissed legal complaints
from Slovakia and Hungary
over accepting refugees. A
quota system adopted in 2015
is aimed at easing pressure on
Italy and Greece. Countries
refusing to respect quotas
could now face ﬁnes. 

David Davis, Britain’s Brexit
secretary, assured Parliament
that talks in Brussels over
Britain’s exit from the Euro-
pean Union were making
“concrete progress”. Yet EU
negotiators suggested that not
enough had been settled,
especially on Britain’s exit bill,
to start talks on future trade in
October, as Britain wants. 

Packed with corruption

Police in Brazil found suitcases
stuﬀed with cash worth more
than $16m in an apartment

used by one of President Mi-
chel Temer’s former cabinet
ministers. The stash was dis-
covered the same day that
Rodrigo Janot, the chief prose-
cutor, charged two previous
presidents, Dilma Rousseﬀ and
Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva, of the
opposition Workers’ Party,
with running a “criminal
organisation” that collected
more than $450m in bribes. 

The Revolutionary Armed
Forces of Colombia (FARC)
completed their transition
from a guerrilla army to a
political party, keeping their
acronym but changing their
name to the Common Alterna-
tive Revolutionary Force and
their logo to a red rose. Colom-
bia’s president, Juan Manuel
Santos, announced the ﬁrst
bilateral ceaseﬁre between his
government and the National
Liberation Army, another
leftist guerrilla group.

Hurricane Irma ripped apart
buildings, ﬂooded homes and
damaged infrastructure on
several Caribbean islands,
including St Martin, St Barthé-
lemy and Barbuda. At least
nine people were killed. Bar-
buda was left “barely habit-
able”, said the prime minister
of Antigua and Barbuda. Resi-
dents of the Dominican Re-
public, Haiti and Cuba braced
themselves for heavy rain and
185-mph winds. Donald Trump
declared a state of emergency
in Florida, Puerto Rico and the
US Virgin Islands.

Deal or no deal

America’s ambassador to the
UN, Nikki Haley, hinted that
President Donald Trump
would not recertify a nuclear
accord signed with Iran in 2015
when it comes up for renewal
in mid-October. He may leave
it to Congress. International
inspectors recently declared
that Iran is complying with the
agreement to constrain its
nuclear-weapons programme.

The Syrian army and its allies
pushed into the eastern city of
Deir ez-Zor, one of the last
strongholds of Islamic State in
Syria. The soldiers freed a
government-held enclave that
had been under siege since

2014. And Israel bombed a site
in Syria that has been linked to
chemical weapons.

Kenya’s electoral commission
set October 17th as the date for
a new presidential election.
The Supreme Court annulled a
vote held in August, saying
proper procedures had not
been followed. 

A dream deferred

America’s attorney-general,
Jeﬀ Sessions, announced that
in six months the government
would end Deferred Action
for Childhood Arrivals
(DACA), an Obama-era pro-
gramme that allowed around
800,000 immigrants who
were brought to America
illegally as children to live and
work legally in the country.
Young adult immigrants, who
call themselves “Dreamers”,
urged Congress to pass a law to
replace the programme. 

Residents of Texan towns
clobbered by Hurricane Har-
vey began sorting through the
wreckage. Governor Greg
Abbott said the damage could
cost up to $180bn. The House
of Representatives approved
nearly $8bn in initial emergen-
cy aid and congressional lead-
ers announced a deal with
President Donald Trump to tie
Harvey relief to short-term
government-funding measures
and to raise the debt ceiling
until December 15th. 

Oﬃcials from America, Mexi-
co and Canada concluded a
second round of talks about
the North American Free
Trade Agreement. “Our work
continues at a record pace,”
said Robert Lighthizer, the US
representative. But progress on
controversial issues appeared
to be minimal. 

1

6 The world this week

The Economist September 9th 2017

its industry, and said it might
pursue “regulatory options” to
protect its position.

Bell Pottinger, a prominent
London public-relations ﬁrm,
put itself up for sale after its
chief executive, and another
senior manager, stepped
down. The ﬁrm ran into trou-
ble after being expelled by its
industry body, the Public
Relations and Communica-
tions Association, which had
found that Bell Pottinger’s
work for South Africa’s inﬂu-
ential Gupta family was likely
to have inﬂamed “racial dis-
cord” in the country. 

The European Court of Justice
gave ﬁrms oﬀering price re-
bates a reprieve. By sending an
appeal by Intel over a €1bn
($1.2bn) EU ﬁne in 2009 back to
a lower court for reconsider-
ation, the court said EU anti-
trust authorities would have to
show rebates harmed competi-
tion to be deemed illegal.

Cr ypto curbs

A group of Chinese regulators,
led by its central bank, de-
clared initial coin oﬀerings
(ICOs), a type of fundraising
for companies based on issu-
ing virtual tokens, to be illegal.
The regulators not only called
a halt to new oﬀerings, but also
said that proceeds from al-

ready completed ICOs should
be refunded to investors.

Six banks, including HSBC and
Credit Suisse, signed on to a
consortium spearheaded by
UBS, another bank, to create a
“utility settlement coin”, a new
form of blockchain-based
digital currency for clearing
and settling transactions that it
hopes to launch next year. This
brings the total number of
ﬁnancial institutions involved
in the project to 11.

A review by PwC into a scan-
dal over sham accounts at
Wells Fargo revealed that the
American bank had opened
1.4m more unauthorised ac-
counts, or around 70% more,
than had initially been esti-
mated last year.

Trouble in paradise. Nordea,
the Nordic region’s largest
bank, announced that it would
move its headquarters from
Stockholm to Helsinki. The
move comes after over a year
of complaints from the bank
about Swedish policies, in-
cluding plans for a bank levy
(since put on hold). The bank
cited Finland’s membership in
the EU’s banking union, which
will allow the lender to be
regulated in the same way as
its European peers, as the main
reason for choosing the Finn-

ish capital over Copenhagen,
the Danish capital, which it
also considered.

Four of the top ten executives
at Reckitt Benckiser, a British
consumer-goods giant, are
leaving the ﬁrm. The shake-out
follows a series of setbacks,
including a hit from a severe
cyber-attack in June.

Happy birds

Rovio, a Finnish games com-
pany and maker of “Angry
Birds”, is planning an initial
public oﬀering. The ﬁrm suf-
fered when interest in its signa-
ture game ﬂagged in 2014, but
is now basking in the success
of the ﬁrst “Angry Birds” ﬁlm,
which grossed $350m at box
oﬃces worldwide in 2016.
Some worry that the ﬁrm is too
much of a one-tweet wonder.

Other economic data and news
can be found on pages 76-77

Business

The vice-chairman of Ameri-
ca’s Federal Reserve, Stanley
Fischer, unexpectedly resigned
for “personal reasons”. His
term was not due to end until
June 2018. The resignation of
Mr Fischer, who has also
served as head of the Bank of
Israel and as chief economist
of the World Bank, increases
the pressure on President
Donald Trump to ﬁll a mount-
ing list of vacancies at the Fed. 

The number of jobs in Ameri-
ca grew by 156,000 in August,
less than analysts had expect-
ed. Unemployment ticked up
to 4.4%, from 4.3% in July.

Amid signs of robust economic
growth, the Bank of Canada
raised its benchmark interest
rate by 0.25%, to 1%, less than
two months after its previous
rate hike in July.

After its economy added
59,000 jobs in July, total em-
ployment in Italy rose above
23m for the ﬁrst time since
2008.

Norway’s sovereign-wealth
fund, the world’s largest, pro-
posed a signiﬁcant change in
how its bond portfolio should
be measured, recommending
that only government bonds in
dollars, euros or sterling
should make up its benchmark
index, rather than bonds in 23
currencies. The fund has been
shifting away from bonds and
towards equities.

Winning lots of won

Workers at Kia won a victory
over their employer in a wage
dispute when a South Korean
court ordered the carmaker to
pay 420bn won ($370m) in
back pay. Kia says the ruling
will cost it closer to 1trn won
once all wages are adjusted.

United Technologies, an
American aerospace company,
announced that it would
acquire a competitor, Rock-
well Collins, for $30bn. Boe-
ing, one of the putative combi-
nation’s largest customers, said
it was “sceptical” that the deal
would be in the best interest of

Leaders

Nowhere to hide

The Economist September 9th 2017 7

Facial recognition is not just another technology. It will change society
THE human face is a remark-
able piece of work. The as-
tonishing variety of facial fea-
tures helps people recognise
each other and is crucial to the
formation of complex societies.
So is the face’s ability to send
emotional 
signals, whether
through an involuntary blush or the artiﬁce of a false smile.
People spend much of their waking lives, in the oﬃce and the
courtroom as well as the bar and the bedroom, reading faces,
for signs of attraction, hostility, trust and deceit. They also
spend plenty of time trying to dissimulate.
Technology is rapidly catching up with the human ability
to read faces. In America facial recognition is used by churches
to track worshippers’ attendance; in Britain, by retailers to spot
past shoplifters. This year Welsh police used it to arrest a sus-
pect outside a football game. In China it veriﬁes the identities
of ride-hailing drivers, permits tourists to enter attractions and
lets people pay for things with a smile. Apple’s new iPhone is
expected to use it to unlock the homescreen (see page 53).
Set against human skills, such applications might seem in-
cremental. Some breakthroughs, such as ﬂight or the internet,
obviously transform human abilities; facial recognition seems
merely to encode them. Although faces are peculiar to individ-
uals, they are also public, so technology does not, at ﬁrst sight,
intrude on something that is private. And yet the ability to re-
cord, store and analyse images of faces cheaply, quickly and on
a vast scale promises one day to bring about fundamental
changes to notions of privacy, fairness and trust.

The ﬁnal frontier
Start with privacy. One big diﬀerence between faces and other
biometric data, such as ﬁngerprints, is that they work at a dis-
tance. Anyone with a phone can take a picture for facial-recog-
nition programs to use. FindFace, an app in Russia, compares
snaps of strangers with pictures on VKontakte, a social net-
work, and can identify people with a 70% accuracy rate. Face-
book’s bank of facial images cannot be scraped by others, but
the Silicon Valley giant could obtain pictures of visitors to a car
showroom, say, and later use facial recognition to serve them
ads for cars. Even if private ﬁrms are unable to join the dots be-
tween images and identity, the state often can. China’s govern-
ment keeps a record of its citizens’ faces; photographs of half of
America’s adult population are stored in databases that can be
used by the FBI. Law-enforcement agencies now have a pow-
erful weapon in their ability to track criminals, but at enor-
mous potential cost to citizens’ privacy.
The face is not just a name-tag. It displays a lot of other infor-
mation—and machines can read that, too. Again, that promises
beneﬁts. Some ﬁrms are analysing faces to provide automated
diagnoses of rare genetic conditions, such as Hajdu-Cheney
syndrome, far earlier than would otherwise be possible. Sys-
tems that measure emotion may give autistic people a grasp of
social signals they ﬁnd elusive. But the technology also threat-
ens. Researchers at Stanford University have demonstrated

that, when shown pictures of one gay man, and one straight
man, the algorithm could attribute their sexuality correctly 81%
of the time. Humans managed only 61% (see page 67). In coun-
tries where homosexuality is a crime, software which prom-
ises to infer sexuality from a face is an alarming prospect. 

Keys, wallet, balaclava
Less violent forms of discrimination could also become com-
mon. Employers can already act on their prejudices to deny
people a job. But facial recognition could make such bias rou-
tine, enabling ﬁrms to ﬁlter all job applications for ethnicity
and signs of intelligence and sexuality. Nightclubs and sports
grounds may face pressure to protect people by scanning en-
trants’ faces for the threat of violence—even though, owing to
the nature of machine-learning, all facial-recognition systems
inevitably deal in probabilities. Moreover, such systems may
be biased against those who do not have white skin, since al-
gorithms trained on data sets of mostly white faces do not
work well with diﬀerent ethnicities. Such biases have cropped
up in automated assessments used to inform courts’ decisions
about bail and sentencing. 
Eventually, continuous facial recording and gadgets that
paint computerised data onto the real world might change the
texture of social interactions. Dissembling helps grease the
wheels of daily life. If your partner can spot every suppressed
yawn, and your boss every grimace of irritation, marriages
and working relationships will be more truthful, but less har-
monious. The basis of social interactions might change, too,
from a set of commitments founded on trust to calculations of
risk and reward derived from the information a computer atta-
ches to someone’s face. Relationships might become more ra-
tional, but also more transactional.
In democracies, at least, legislation can help alter the bal-
ance of good and bad outcomes. European regulators have
embedded a set of principles in forthcoming data-protection
regulation, decreeing that biometric information, which
would include “faceprints”, belongs to its owner and that its
use requires consent—so that, in Europe, unlike America, Face-
book could not just sell ads to those car-showroom visitors.
Laws against discrimination can be applied to an employer
screening candidates’ images. Suppliers of commercial face-
recognition systems might submit to audits, to demonstrate
that their systems are not propagating bias unintentionally.
Firms that use such technologies should be held accountable.
Such rules cannot alter the direction of travel, however.
Cameras will only become more common with the spread of
wearable devices. Eﬀorts to bamboozle facial-recognition sys-
tems, from sunglasses to make-up, are already being overtak-
en; research from the University of Cambridge shows that arti-
ﬁcial intelligence can reconstruct the facial structures of
people in disguise. Google has explicitly turned its back on
matching faces to identities, for fear of its misuse by undemo-
cratic regimes. Other tech ﬁrms seem less picky. Amazon and
Microsoft are both using their cloud services to oﬀer face recog-
nition; it is central to Facebook’s plans. Governments will not
want to forgo its beneﬁts. Change is coming. Face up to it. 7

8 Leaders

Germany’s election

Angela’s unﬁnished business

The Economist September 9th 2017

Mrs Merkel must become bolder in her (almost inevitable) fourth term
TO HER many fans, Angela
Merkel is the hero who
stands up to Donald Trump and
Vladimir Putin, and who gener-
ously opened her country to ref-
ugees. To others, she is the vil-
lain whose 
ill-thought-out
gamble on immigration is “ruin-
ing Germany”, as Mr Trump once put it, and whose austerity
policies laid waste to southern Europe.
The fans are closer to the truth. Her country has indeed
done well under her leadership and the world been better for
her steady hand. But during three terms in oﬃce, Mrs Merkel
has not done enough to prepare Germany for the future. If her
many years at the top are to be viewed as more than merely
suﬃcient, she must use her fourth term to bring about change.

A steady hand in a turbulent world
There is little doubt that Mrs Merkel and her Christian Demo-
cratic Union are coasting towards victory when Germany
votes on September 24th. That is partly owing to the lacklustre
Martin Schulz, her Social Democratic Party (SPD) rival. His
party’s domestic policy is undistinctive and his foreign policy
barely credible. He has also failed to put the chancellor on the
spot. Their debate on September 3rd was more like the negotia-
tion of a new “grand coalition” than a clash of ideas.
But her imminent victory also reﬂects how Germany has
prospered since 2005, when Mrs Merkel took oﬃce (see brief-
ing). Unemployment has fallen from 11.2% to 3.8%; wages are
rising; consumer conﬁdence is at a high. The chancellor has
stood by the labour-market reforms introduced by Gerhard
Schröder, her SPD predecessor—though she has not extended
them. She has provided stable and unideological political
leadership. German society has become more open and re-
laxed on her watch; she allowed, for instance, a vote on gay
marriage even though she personally opposed it.
And in trying to cope with the euro crisis and the inﬂux of
refugees from the Middle East and north Africa, Mrs Merkel
has proved to be the indispensable European. Beyond that, she
persuaded Germans that their country should take on more of
the responsibilities its size demands but its history makes diﬃ-
cult. At summits she is a calm, well-informed presence, help-
ing to broker European sanctions against Russia over its inva-
sion of Ukraine, and the Paris climate accord. Germany is also
taking on international burdens, with troops in Afghanistan,
Mali and Lithuania, a scale of deployment unthinkable a de-
cade ago. Her commitment to NATO’s target for defence spend-
ing of 2% of GDP speaks of a country growing up in the world. 
Yet, for all this, Mrs Merkel has often governed on the “easy”
setting, especially in her policies at home. She has enjoyed a
host of advantages. Mr Schröder’s reforms made German
workers competitive. The euro, raw materials and borrowing
have all been cheap for much of her chancellorship, too.
Emerging economies such as China cannot yet make the
things Germany does (like luxury cars), so they import them.
Germany has the second-oldest population in the world, but

its baby-boomer bulge is largely still of working age. The coun-
try has been living through a golden age. 
The trouble is that none of the factors that brought this
about is permanent. Mrs Merkel had a chance to prepare the
country for the future. She has squandered it. Her govern-
ment’s obsession with balanced books has led it to invest too
little. The net value of German infrastructure has fallen since
2012. Since 2010 the country’s broadband speed has fallen
from 12th to 29th in the world. New industries like the internet
of things and electric cars are underdeveloped. The mighty
German automotive industry took a bad gamble on diesel en-
gines, and is now mired in allegations of faked emissions tests.
Little has been done to prepare Germany for its demo-
graphic crunch. Mrs Merkel’s outgoing government not only
reversed a raise in the retirement age, but cut it to 63 for some
workers and introduced a “mothers’ pension” for women who
took time oﬀ to care for children before 1992, beneﬁting a gener-
ation that was already well-catered for. At the same time she
did little for those Germans left behind. Inequality and the use
of food-banks have both risen on her watch. 
When she does take big decisions, Mrs Merkel has a habit of
ducking the consequences. The switch to renewable energy is
proving so slow and expensive that Germany’s coal usage and
carbon emissions are rising—her sudden decision to shut the
country’s nuclear plants after a meltdown in Japan only made
the transition harder. Having helped to hold the euro zone to-
gether through a series of weekend crises, Mrs Merkel (along
with Wolfgang Schäuble, her ﬁnance minister) has stood in the
way of reforms that would mitigate the next crisis. The task of
integrating legions of refugees has been left primarily to cash-
strapped state governments and citizens. The chancellor bare-
ly talks about them these days, having reduced arrival num-
bers using a murky repatriation deal with Turkey.
In the election campaign Mrs Merkel has said little to con-
front her compatriots with the need to reform governance of
the euro, to raise investment and to prepare the economy for a
revolution in the nature of work. Instead, her manifesto is
vague, and her public appearances have been banal.

Action needed in Act IV
And yet Mrs Merkel could accomplish a lot in her next—and
possibly last—term. She could use Germany’s budget surplus,
of €26bn ($31bn) last year and rising, to invest more in human
and physical capital. She could look to Emmanuel Macron of
France for ideas to strengthen institutions that govern the euro
and for a sense of urgency about high-tech. She could cement
Germany’s foreign-policy credentials, by pressing on towards
NATO’s 2% goal. Her legacy depends on it.
Success will partly depend on Mrs Merkel picking the right
partners in government. A continuation of the present grand
coalition with the SPD threatens yet more sleepy stasis. Instead
she should team up with the free-market Free Democratic
Party and the Greens—who are wise on Europe and tougher on
Russia. Such a coalition would stand a chance of shaking the
country up. As its leader, the hesitant Mrs Merkel might even
become the chancellor who surprised everybody. 7

The Economist September 9th 2017 

North Korea

Messaging the shooter

Leaders 9

Deterring a nuclear-armed North Korea requires clarity and consistency from America’s government
ON SEPTEMBER 3rd North
Korea 
tested what
it
claimed was a hydrogen bomb.
Whether it was really that, or
merely a boosted ﬁssion device,
is unclear (see page 20). What is
certain is that the bomb was hef-
ty enough to cause big earth
tremors in neighbouring China. Seismic data suggest the blast
was around 120 kilotons—at least eight times more powerful
than the North’s previous test a year ago. If converted into a
warhead small enough to ﬁt on its Hwasong-14 intercontinen-
tal ballistic missile, it could kill nearly everyone across a 15-
square-kilometre area. Even if Kim Jong Un’s ruthless regime
does not have a hydrogen bomb today, it will within a year or
so probably have mastered a technology that has the potential
for almost unlimited destruction.
This is a terrible prospect. Alas, there are no good options
for preventing it. Talking is always worthwhile, but North Kor-
ea is unlikely to give ground—and is untrustworthy if it says it
will. A pre-emptive attack on North Korea’s nuclear facilities
should be out of the question. The North’s existing weapons,
including shorter-range missiles with ﬁssion warheads, would
imperil the lives of millions of South Koreans and Japanese, as
well as around 300,000 Americans who live in those coun-
tries. Chinese state media have debated whether China
should squeeze North Korea’s oil imports. However, this
would hurt ordinary North Koreans ﬁrst, and China does not
want to squeeze so hard that Mr Kim’s regime collapses.
So Mr Kim must be contained and deterred. To that end, it is
essential America and its allies present a united front. As-
toundingly, President Donald Trump’s ﬁrst reaction to the nuc-
lear test was to lambast South Korea’s president, Moon Jae-in,
for seeking to talk to North Korea, accusing his government on

Twitter of “appeasement”. He took almost 36 hours to tele-
phone Mr Moon and then only after it had emerged that he
had asked aides to prepare for America to pull out of a decade-
old free-trade deal with South Korea. Even if the economics
were sound (they are not), this is an awful time to pick a ﬁght. 
Mr Kim would love to drive a wedge between America and
its allies. He hopes that a credible nuclear threat to American
cities will weaken America’s security guarantees to South Ko-
rea and Japan. Put crudely, Mr Kim wants to open up the old
cold-war question of whether an American president would
really risk San Francisco, say, to defend Seoul. If the answer is
no, Mr Kim will soon be able to keep America at bay with his
nukes and threaten his neighbours with impunity. For Mr
Trump to let this happen would be an unforgivable blunder.
James Mattis, Mr Trump’s defence secretary, tried to repair
some of the damage after a meeting at the White House to dis-
cuss the test. Mr Mattis said that, although the administration
still hoped for a diplomatic path to North Korean denuclearisa-
tion, “any threat to the United States or its territories, including
Guam, or our allies will be met with a massive military re-
sponse.” He should have been more precise. Does “any threat”
include ﬁery rhetoric? Against an apocalyptic blusterer like Mr
Kim, it certainly should not. Mr Mattis should simply have stat-
ed that America would respond quickly and forcefully to an
imminent threat by North Korea of an attack on its allies or it-
self. Mr Kim should be in no doubt that if he starts a war, he
will perish along with his dynasty. 

Speak plainly and carry a big stick
Deterrence works when red lines are reasonably clear. With
Mr Trump they are not. That creates the danger that Mr Kim
might miscalculate, with catastrophic consequences. In deal-
ing with the world’s most dangerous regime, there is no substi-
tute for steadiness, consistency and clarity. 7

Amer ica’s immigration laws

Let them stay

DACA
recipients

All
Amer icans

(25-54 years)

78

93

Aged 25 years and over, 2017, %

Amer icans in employment

Donald Trump is right: Congress should pass DACA
IF YOU could design people in
a laboratory to be an adorn-
ment to America they would
look like the recipients of DACA.
Deferred Action for Childhood
Arrivals, an executive action is-
sued in 2012 by Barack Obama
to protect most of those who
were brought to the country as children from deportation, cov-
ers about 800,000 people. They are a high-achieving lot. More
than 90% of those now aged over 25 are employed; they create
businesses at twice the rate of the public as a whole; many
have spouses and children who are citizens. They are Ameri-

can in every sense bar the bureaucratic one.
Correcting that ought to be about as hard politically as de-
claring a new public holiday. Instead, there is a good chance
that Congress will return them to their prior limbo, or worse.
Recipients of DACA were obliged to give their addresses to the
federal government, which is charged with immigration en-
forcement, making it considerably easier to round them up
now. After the Trump administration announced that it would
end the programme in six months’ time, and called on Con-
gress to pass a bill to replace it, the White House issued a set of
talking points which suggested that Immigration and Customs
Enforcement would ﬁnd this personal information, given in
exchange for shelter, very useful.

1

10 Leaders

The Economist September 9th 2017

2

Both Mr Trump and Jeﬀ Sessions, his attorney-general, pre-
sented the decision to end DACA as a victory for the rule of law
(see page 27). There is something to this. Mr Obama said pub-
licly that he doubted he had the authority to protect people
from the enforcement of immigration laws passed by Con-
gress and signed by previous presidents. Then he decided that,
in fact, he did. Mr Trump’s administration thus faced having to
defend an executive action by its predecessor from a legal chal-
lenge by several Republican attorneys-general—a challenge
that the administration might lose in the Supreme Court at the
hands of his own nominee, Neil Gorsuch. With that prospect,
Mr Trump pushed the decision back to Congress.
But the choice on DACA is not between the rule of law and
rule by presidential edict. It is between two diﬀerent types of
legal failure—executive actions that are possibly unconstitu-
tional and a set of immigration laws that are deﬁnitely impos-
sible to enforce. There are about 11m people in the country ille-
gally, many of whom arrived decades ago. America already
spends a huge amount on deportation—more than on the FBI,
DEA, Secret Service, US Marshals and Bureau of Alcohol, To-
bacco and Firearms, combined. At current deportation rates it
would take over 40 years to expel them all. Congress has not
willed the means to make this happen and would not want to
face the consequences of doing so. The collective failure to say
this on the part of the Republicans, who control both houses of
Congress, is a giant exercise in ignoring reality. “Useless laws
weaken necessary laws,” wrote Montesquieu, whose work

the authors of the constitution consulted frequently. That is a
fair description of the eﬀect of America’s immigration laws,
whose uselessness results in lawbreaking becoming routine.

Deferred action
The solution is for Congress to write DACA, or something like
it, into law. Yet the long-running saga over DACA and its recipi-
ents, whose average age is now 25, has been another sign that
Congress’s default setting is to inaction. Mr Obama issued his
executive action after years of waiting for Congress to write
legislation. Congressmen ducked the decision, leading the
president to take it unilaterally, on questionable authority.
Mr Trump’s call on Congress to act may set up a repeat of
this cycle. The programme expires in six months’ time, at
which point many Republican congressmen will face primar-
ies. They will be confronted by challengers denouncing any-
one who supports such legislation as being pro-immigration-
amnesty and too unpatriotic to put real Americans ﬁrst, a Re-
publican strain of identity politics that has been turbocharged
by Mr Trump. If Congress fails to decide yet again, then Mr
Trump may ﬁnd himself in the same position as his predeces-
sor, reintroducing something like DACA by executive action. 
Better if the lawmakers who spent years denouncing Mr
Obama for grabbing power from Congress now choose to ex-
ercise that power themselves. The alternative is an act of eco-
nomic and moral self-harm, in which Congress would further
undermine both itself and the standing of the law. 7

China’s economy

Created destruction

10

12

14

16

50

45

40

2006 08

As % of world total

China, coal production

Investors have found faith in China’s capacity cuts. They should look more closely
STOCKMARKETS have been
on a tear over the past 18
months. Shares are, on average,
up by a third globally. Commod-
ities have rallied. And the opti-
mism has infected corporate
treasurers, who, for the ﬁrst time
in ﬁve years, are spending more
on new buildings and equipment. Plenty of factors have fed
into the upturn, from Europe’s recovery to early hopes for the
Trump presidency. But its origins date back to a commitment
by China to demolish steel mills and shut coal mines.
On the face of it, that is an unlikely spark for a change in sen-
timent. Normally, growth comes from the investment in new
facilities, not the closure of those in use. In fact, China’s case is
a rare one. By taking on extreme overcapacity, its cutbacks have
provided a boost, for itself and for the global economy. The
risk, however, is that the way the country is going about the
cuts both disguises old ﬂaws and creates new ones. 

the excesses piled up in China over the years, they weighed on
global prices, depressing proﬁts for all. However, unlike their
international rivals, Chinese ﬁrms could carry on expanding,
conﬁdent of state support.
Then, in early 2016, China unveiled plans to cut its steel and
coal capacity by at least 10% over ﬁve years, reducing potential
global supply by 5%. The government’s theory was that it
could turn the vicious industrial cycle into a virtuous one.
With less production, prices would rise, leading to higher pro-
ﬁts and, ultimately, a healthier economy. There were plenty of
doubts about China’s ability to follow through; after all,
pledges to cut capacity had featured in oﬃcials’ plans since the
early 2000s, and over-investment had continued unabated.
But the idea that things might be diﬀerent this time has grad-
ually caught on (see page 59). Coal and steel prices have
soared, as have proﬁts in those industries. That set oﬀ a dra-
matic shift in market sentiment about China. Convinced that
Xi Jinping, China’s president, has the will and ability to impose
capacity cuts, investors have shed their fears that damaging
deﬂation might be China’s next export. The yuan has appreci-
ated; nominal growth is just shy of a ﬁve-year high. Economic
policymakers in Beijing have regained some of their standing,
which had been dented by a stockmarket crash and a ham-
ﬁsted currency devaluation in 2015. Global markets are re-
assured by the steady hand of Chinese central planners. 
That conﬁdence may be misplaced. Investors are overlook-
ing two shortcomings in China’s approach. The ﬁrst is the na-

1

Steel crazy after all these years
China needs lots of material to build all its homes, trains and
tunnels. Even so, it produces more than it can use. It accounts
for roughly half of global production of steel, coal, aluminium,
glass and cement. By one oft-cited gauge, China’s unused steel
capacity equals the total annual output of the next four biggest
producers ( Japan, India, America and Russia) combined. As

The Economist September 9th 2017 

Leaders 11

2 ture of top-down diktats about supply, which lack ﬂexibility
and therefore tend to generate volatile outcomes. China want-
ed to puﬀ up prices. But the surge that it has caused has gone
well beyond what it intended, raising concerns that high prices
will lead once more to surplus capacity. Local oﬃcials, still
hungry for growth, have dusted oﬀ their plans for big new coal
mines. Oﬃcials have started to warn about a speculative bub-
ble in the steel market. In Chinese ports stocks of iron ore, a vi-
tal ingredient in steelmaking, are near record highs.
The second problem is that enforced production cuts are
not a genuine solution to overcapacity. That ﬁrms listen to the
government in China should never have been in doubt; the
problem is that they still do not pay suﬃcient heed to the mar-
ket. In many cases the cuts are not all they appear. In the coal
industry, for instance, oﬃcials last year simply decreed that
mines should operate for just 276 days—a limit that they un-

wound this year. 
More fundamentally, China has done little to tackle the un-
derlying causes of overcapacity. The banking system contin-
ues to direct cheap capital at favoured projects and companies.
State-owned ﬁrms can still be reckless in their investments,
safe in the knowledge that they can always be bailed out. And
the government’s policy of earmarking bits of the economy for
development sets oﬀ mad rushes into them. Even as China is
ﬁghting to rein in excess capacity in heavy industry, it is laying
the groundwork for the same aﬄiction in new ﬁelds such as ro-
botics and advanced manufacturing.
China has done more to turn around its industrial sector
than many expected, to the beneﬁt of its own economy and
the wider world. Investors are right to conclude that its plan-
ners are powerful. Even so, a tendency towards overcapacity
still lurks, and Chinese oﬃcials are still fallible. 7

The Rohingyas

Going along with a pogrom

and Rakhines, a largely Buddhist ethnic group inhabiting the
same region, the local media painted the Rohingyas as the ag-
gressors, even though they came oﬀ much the worse. More-
over, Ms Suu Kyi has little authority over the army, which
granted itself the right to regulate itself (and the police) before
handing power to her civilian government. Why take on an
unpopular ﬁght that she had almost no prospect of winning?
But the violence in Rakhine has reached such an uncon-
scionable level that there can be no justifying continued pas-
sivity. Whether it is popular or not, the ﬁrst duty of any govern-
ment is to keep the people it governs alive. Even if Ms Suu Kyi
cannot rein in the army, she should at least denounce its be-
haviour, and make clear to ordinary Burmese the horrors it is
unleashing in their name. She has managed to face the gener-
als down once before, after all, during her campaign for de-
mocracy, and retains immense moral authority.

The Burmese government must at least try to stop the army’s attacks on the Rohingya minority
THE reports are horrifying:
soldiers and militiamen sur-
rounding villages, raping wom-
en, decapitating children, herd-
ing men into buildings and
setting them ablaze. The Bur-
mese army is letting few outsid-
ers into the northern part of Rak-
hine state, near the border with Bangladesh, so it is hard to be
certain about the scale of the atrocities. But the UN says that
well over 150,000 refugees have ﬂed to Bangladesh since Au-
gust 25th, with 35,000 crossing the border in a single day this
week. They are the lucky ones. Satellite images reveal burning
villages across northern Rakhine, and bodies have been wash-
ing up on the shores of the river that separates Myanmar from
Bangladesh (see page 21). The victims are Rohingyas, a Muslim
minority that has been persecuted by the Burmese authorities
with varying degrees of ferocity since the 1980s.
Today’s government is led by Aung San Suu Kyi, herself a
victim of persecution by past military regimes, and winner of
the Nobel peace prize for her long vigil for democracy. But she
seems no more sympathetic to the Rohingyas’ plight than her
jackbooted predecessors. She denies that there is any system-
atic abuse by the security services, claiming instead that they
are simply trying to hunt down organised Rohingya militants
who have attacked police and army posts. Pleas from the UN,
neighbouring governments, aid agencies and even her fellow
Nobel laureates to curb the violence and allow humanitarian
aid to ﬂow to the victims have had no eﬀect. She is not even
willing to use the term Rohingya; her government dismisses
the 1m-strong group that has been present in Rakhine since
precolonial times as illegal immigrants from Bangladesh.
Ms Suu Kyi’s initial reluctance to take up the Rohingya
cause was understandable, though not admirable. The vast
majority of Burmese share the oﬃcial view, that Rohingyas are
foreign interlopers; many also imagine that, as Muslims, they
are plotting against Buddhism, the religion of the majority.
When sectarian riots broke out in 2012 between Rohingyas

Give and take
By the same token, Western governments have been reluctant
to take Ms Suu Kyi too strongly to task, for fear of undermining
the transition to democracy that they advocated for so long.
The time for such delicacy is past. Democracy is of little worth
if it entails mass displacement and slaughter. Foreign donors
should make it clear that continued development aid depends
on eﬀorts to end to the violence.
Best of all would be to try to change the army’s behaviour
by adopting sanctions that punish it directly. It is heavily in-
volved in business, with investments in everything from jade-
mining to mobile networks. The top brass, in particular, bene-
ﬁt from sinecures in and payouts from this empire. Should
America and other countries reinstate penalties for ﬁrms that
do business with companies linked to the army, the generals’
wealth would be imperilled. That might make them reconsid-
er their conduct in Rakhine. The Burmese army is not easy to
inﬂuence, but economic and diplomatic isolation do seem to
have played a part in persuading it to surrender power in the
ﬁrst place. To spare the Rohingyas further suﬀering, such sanc-
tions should be deployed again. 7

12

Letters

Political Islam

As you rightly surmise (“Islam
and democracy”, August 26th),
there appear to be varied and
shifting positions among
Islamists and Muslims on the
question of democracy as well
as broader Western principles.
During the Golden Age,
Islamic scholars were open to
knowledge and wisdom from
other cultures, and the librar-
ies of the Muslim world were
replete with ancient works of
the Greek philosophers, which
were studied and debated in
the Muslim world. The Golden
Age expired because, begin-
ning with Al Gazali, successive
scholars of Islam argued that
the Koran was the only source
of wisdom. For most of the
past 700 years and in the Mus-
lim world today, there is only
Islamic jurisprudence, derived
solely from the Koran, the
Hadith and interpretations of
Islamic jurisprudence which
are the domain of four schools
of Islam. Reason has no place.
It is true that many enlight-
ened and educated Muslims
adhere to democratic princi-
ples. But democracy cannot
prevail in the Middle East until
enlightened and educated
Muslims are bold and willing
to overthrow the ﬁrm grip that
Muslim clergy have on the
minds of ordinary Muslims.
This needs a new Ataturk; a
Muslim Reformation; and,
above all, a return to Reason. 

MARK LOGGIN

Maidenhead, Berkshire

The United States has been
lucky in many ways, and one
of the most important is that
our founding fathers had the
wisdom to separate the church
and state constitutionally.
Similarly, President Harry S.

Truman had the wisdom to
make such separation part of
the constitution he imposed
after the Japanese uncondi-
tional surrender. Lenin, Stalin
and Mao exterminated the
church’s power over govern-
ment with ghastly purges. This
has created a modern world
with religion separate from
government—except in the
Islamic states. Until Islam
accepts this subordinate posi-
tion, there will be no peace in
the Middle East.

RICHARD S. BLAKE

East Falmouth, Massachusetts

You don’t Say

The term “Say’s Law”, (Eco-
nomics brief, August 12th) was
invented by the American
economist, Fred Taylor, and
popularised in his introduc-
tory text, published in 1921.
Moreover, the phrase “supply
creates its own demand” is not
classical in origin, but was ﬁrst
used in print by another Amer-
ican economist, Harlan
McCracken, in a text that John
Maynard Keynes is known to
have read while he was writ-
ing the General Theory. Jean-
Baptiste Say neither invented
the concept nor was he its most
staunch defender.

STEVEN KATES

Associate Professor
School of Economics, Finance
and Marketing
RMIT University
Melbourne, Australia

Say’s monetary views were
shaped by his family’s disas-
trous experience with in-
ﬂationary assignats in France.
Likewise, David Hume’s expe-
rience living in London
through the period of gold
suspension reﬁned the Quanti-
ty Theory of Money. Both Say’s
and Hume’s seminal contribu-
tions to economic theory were
grounded in their own perso-
nal experiences of diﬀerent
national monetary traditions.

FRANCIS DANIELS

Melrose Estate, South Afr ica

Better buildings

The call for mass-production
techniques to be applied to the
building trade is not new. Nor
is the call for modular build-

The Economist September 9th 2017

ing, particularly in housing. Le
Corbusier’s 1923 Utopian tract,
“Towards an Architecture”,
made such demands of a
stagnant industry. “A house is a
machine for living in,” he
famously declared. Le Corbu-
sier called for an engineering
solution to the problem of
producing housing, claiming
the “application of the spirit of
mass production and industri-
al organisation” would pro-
duce housing that was worthy
of a modern age. Le Corbusier
applied this modular approach
to his famous Unité d’habi-
tation in Marseille, though the
entire ediﬁce retains a degree
of craftedness despite its un-
derpinning philosophy of
mass production and modular
construction. Almost a century
on, Le Corbusier’s call still
remains largely unheeded.

GAVIN KIELY

Dublin

related personnel to ensure 
the human rights of those
arrested or suspected fully
complies with international
obligations and human-rights
treaties. Moreover, those per-
sonnel are trained regularly to
raise their awareness of such
obligations.
Pursuing a dialogue with
those who hold diﬀering
views from the state is a na-
tional agenda. The dialogue is
still at a preliminary stage, yet
it is crucial for building trust
and conﬁdence. This is an
inclusive, open process and 
the government considers
input from local people, civil
organisations, religious leaders
and academics to be an impor-
tant part of ﬁnding a sustain-
able solution.

BUSADEE SANTIPITAKS

Spokesperson
Ministr y of Foreign Aﬀairs
Bangkok

Thailand’s minorities

Journalese

“Trampled by elephants”
(August 12th) was misleading
in its treatment of the situation
in the southern region of Thai-
land. The incidents in the
border provinces of Yala,
Pattani and Narathiwat are not
linked to religious strife, as you
claim, but caused by many
factors, including criminal
activities, as well as by conﬂict
of interests in local politics. 
The government’s eﬀort to
resolve the situation there has
led to a decrease in violent
incidents, down by 50% from
October 2016 to March 2017
compared with the same
period in the year before.
This is in part owing to the
philosophies espoused by
the late King Bhumibol Adu-
lyadej, which include adminis-
tering justice and human rights
and dealing with the griev-
ances of those suﬀering from
violence. It also means pro-
moting Islamic practices and
supporting secular and Islamic
education in Yala, Pattani and
Narathiwat, which is contrary
to your assertion that the
government’s policy is one of
assimilation. Like Thais of all
faiths, Thai Muslims are guar-
anteed freedom of religion as
enshrined in the constitution. 
The conduct of security and

Surely the all-time winner of
tabloid-reader-grabbing head-
line-writing ( Johnson, August
26th), had to be the late News
of the World in the 1970s for its
highly informative banner
(quickly picked up by Private
Eye, inevitably): “Nudist Wel-
fare Man’s Wife Falls in Love
with Chinese Hypnotist from
Co-op Bacon Factory”.
Who could resist reading
on? Three missing prepositions
all the same.

CHRIS JOHNSON

Geneva

I take some issue with John-
son’s description of the most
“New York” headline in the
New York Post as “Mob Cop
Sex Fury”. I believe there are at
least two better Post headlines:
“Headless Body in Topless Bar”
and “Head Red Dead” upon
the sudden departure of a
Soviet leader.

GEORGE A. SMITH

Middletown, New York 7

Letters are welcome and should be
addressed to the Editor at 
The Economist, The Adelphi Building,
1-11 John Adam Street, 

London WC2N 6HT

E-mail: letters@economist.com
More letters are available at:

Economist.com/letters

Executive Focus

13

The Economist September 9th 2017

14

Executive Focus

The European Union Agency for the Cooperation of Energy 
Regulators (ACER) fosters a fully integrated and well-functioning 
Internal Energy Market, where electricity and gas are traded and 
supplied according to the highest integrity and transparency 
standards, and EU consumers benefi t from a wider choice, fair 
prices and greater protection. For this purpose, ACER works with 
European Institutions, National Regulatory Authorities (NRAs) and 
stakeholders.

The Agency is looking for its next:

Director

ACER is seeking an experienced senior manager to be the legal 
representative and the public face of the organisation. S/he will 
provide strategic vision and lead a dynamic international team of 
circa 110 exper ts. Based in Ljubljana, Slovenia, the Director will 
develop, communicate and implement the ACER’s work programme.

For a full description of the position, eligibility and selection 
criteria, and of the application process, visit ACER’s website: 
www.acer.europa.eu.

Closing date for applications is 27 September 2017.
The post will be available as of 16 September 2018.

The Economist September 9th 2017

Br ieﬁng Angela Merkel

The livin’ is easy

B R E M E N A N D K Ü H L U N G S B O R N

Angela Merkel has coddled Germany
THE chancellor’s helicopter swoops in
over Kühlungsborn, a Wilhelmine re-
sort on Germany’s Baltic coast. In the
beach-front Concert Garden her face, in
soft focus, beams down from posters pro-
mising “a Germany where we live well
and gladly”. A local Christian Democrat
(CDU) candidate welcomes the chancellor
to the stage, exclaiming: “They used to call
this holiday weather! Now they call it An-
gela Merkel weather.” 

“Holidays”, Mrs Merkel tells the crowd,
“give us the opportunity to think things
over.” It is a competitive world out there,
she reports: the average age in Germany is
45; in Niger and Mali it is 15. But her pre-
scriptions are undemanding. Almost ev-
ery sentence has something for the right
and something for the left. Prosperity must
be earned and fairly distributed. The state
must not boss people around and it must
support them. Refugees must integrate.

The Economist September 9th 2017 15

Diversity is strength. The chancellor rocks
gently from right to left and back as she
speaks, a political hammock cradling her
audience in the afternoon warmth.
Mrs Merkel has been chancellor since
2005. Her centre-right CDU and its Bavar-
ian sister party, the Christian Social Union
(CSU), governed ﬁrst in coalition with the
centre-left Social Democrats (SPD), then
with the pro-business Free Democrats
(FDP), then with the SPD again (see time-
line on next page). The CDU is heading for
another comfortable victory at the Bun-
destag election on September 24th (see
page 43), after which she will lead another
coalition, perhaps with the SPD, perhaps
with the FDP, the Greens or both.
Her years in oﬃce have made her a fa-
miliar ﬁgure to Germans and to the world.
But she remains a conundrum—as inscru-
table, says Der Spiegel, a magazine, as
“sphinxes, divas and queens”. In a quintes-
sentially cryptic aside the chancellor, who
rarely talks about herself or her overall re-
cord, once told an audience: “Merkel is
Merkel, with all the risks and side-eﬀects.”
But which Merkel? Which side-eﬀects?
The chancellor does not work at the
grand desk in her cavernous Berlin oﬃce,
preferring the corner of a meeting table.
The room boasts portraits of Konrad Ade-
nauer—West Germany’s ﬁrst post-war
leader, whose 14 years as chancellor Mrs
Merkel looks likely to surpass come 2019—
and Catherine the Great. There is a silver
cross and a cluster of giant chess pieces.
When visitors call, she shows them the
trace of the now-vanished Berlin Wall from
the window. At night she returns to her
modest ﬂat, where she listens to Wagner
and cooks potato soup. 
Her Lutheran faith (“an inner compass”,
she calls it) expresses itself in her unﬂashy
style and her instincts: debt is bad; helping
the needy, good. She thinks ethically, not
ideologically. “I’m a bit liberal, a bit Chris-
tian-social, a bit conservative,” she said in
2009. For Konstantin Richter, whose novel
“The Chancellor” imagines her inner life,
her distrust of ideology is rooted in her ex-
perience of East Germany: “She witnessed
ideology collapse and believers turn into
non-believers overnight.” 
She is reactive rather than programmat-
ic, managing events as they arise rather
than hatching long-term plans. “She works
like a scientist: she reads lots, assesses the
facts and doesn’t have preconceptions,”
observes Jens Spahn, her CDU colleague
and deputy ﬁnance minister. She monitors
events and mood-shifts in a constant ex-
change of text messages with aides, oﬃ-
cials and MPs. In her campaigning Mrs
Merkel invites voters to endorse her tem-
perament, not speciﬁc proposals. Her mes-
sage: I will handle such dramas as cross my
desk calmly, rationally and without any-
thing so distracting as a project.
A third crucial aspect to her character is

1

16 Br ieﬁng Angela Merkel

The Economist September 9th 2017

2 detachment. She keeps her options open
and strives never to rile or polarise. Her
sentences are paper-chains of subclauses
and qualiﬁcations. East Germany’s para-
noid and hyper-surveilled society and
Helmut Kohl’s patriarchal CDU taught her
the virtues of ambiguity and patience. At a
recent rally in the northern city of Bremen
protesters heckled, kazooed and klaxoned
the chancellor. Barely audible, she
ploughed on unruﬄed: “Some have decid-
ed to spend the next four years yelling,”
she ad-libbed with a shrug and a smile. She
employs similar putdowns—calm but gent-
ly mocking—at international summits. 
Ethical not ideological, reactive not pro-
grammatic and detached not engaged,
Merkelism is the absence of political an-
chors. That suits modern Germany’s politi-
cal culture well. Comfortable circum-
stances suppress the appetite for change.
Its hard-won economic success buoyed for
the time being by a weak euro, low interest
rates, an oil glut and the liberalising labour-
market reforms of her SPD predecessor,
Gerhard Schröder, the country wants an
administrator, not a reformer.

Angela momentum
Yet it is hardly a country with no need for
reform. The lowest-paid 40% of German
workers are earning less in real terms than
20 years ago. Food-bank use is up. The rate
of investment has been dropping since
2012. Bridges creak and potholed roads
challenge even the best-engineered sus-
pensions. Not that Germany’s automotive
excellence is what it once was: the image of
the economically crucial car industry has
been tainted, as has the country’s air, by
emissions from the diesel engines it fa-
vours—a scandal it tried to cover up. Dirty
coal is ﬁlling some of the gap left by the clo-
sure of the country’s nuclear plants as part
of an “energy transformation”; the coun-
try’s carbon-dioxide emissions are up. 
Mrs Merkel bears a good bit of the
blame for all this. Closing the nuclear

The long run

Germany
Unemployment rate, %
12

Mrs Merkel becomes
leader of CDU*

The most centr ist nation

Personal positioning within lef t-r ight
political spectrum, July 2017, %
Extreme left
Left

50

Extreme right
Right
Centre-right 

Germany

Centre-left 

Britain

EU-28

Poland

Italy

Spain

France

0
20
40
Source: Bertelsmann Stiftung

60

80

100

plants was her idea. The car industry has
had an over-cosy relationship with the
parties of her “grand coalition”. After her 12
years as chancellor the tax system remains
strikingly unprogressive and state govern-
ments’ ability to invest in infrastructure or
anything else is limited by an excessively
rigid “debt brake”. Red tape frustrates
builders and entrepreneurs; on average it
takes 4.5 days to start a business in Britain
but 10.5 in Germany. Last time the econ-
omy saw serious reforms there was no
such thing as Facebook, let alone Uber. 
The current election campaign was a
chance to take on what Christian Lindner,
the FDP’s leader, calls the “prosperity hal-
lucination”: that in a changing world more
of the same is good enough. Instead Mrs
Merkel oﬀers balanced banalities. Her crit-
ics call this “asymmetric demobilisation”:
the purposeful pursuit of maximum inof-
fensiveness as a means of lowering turn-
out for her opponents. 
To Mrs Merkel’s acolytes her blandness
shows a refreshing distaste for yah-boo
politics from a leader who refuses to pan-
der to her base. When the local CDU at-
tacked Hamburg’s SPD mayor over the ri-
ots that marred the G20 summit there in
July, for example, Mrs Merkel stepped in to
defend him. This blend of centrist policies

Respondents selecting Angela Merkel
as preferred chancellor, %
75

Election day

8

4

0

CDU f ights election in alliance
with CSU†, but loses

2000 01

02

03

04

05

06

07

08

09

10

11

12

13

14

15

16 17

50

25

0

100

50

0

Federal election results, % 
100

Other
Lef t Party

FDP
CDU/CSU

ELECTED CHANCELLOR

AfD

50

0

COAL IT ION :

SPD +
Greens

CDU/CSU + SPD
“Grand coalition”

CDU/CSU + FDP

CDU/CSU + SPD
“Grand coalition”

2002

05

09

13

Sources: Eurostat; Forsa

*Chr istian Democratic Union    †Chr istian Social Union in Bavar ia

and non-partisan behaviour explains why
her appeal stretches well beyond the
CDU’s typically older, more right-wing
electorate. Younger and Green-leaning vot-
ers like her liberal refugee policies, SPD vot-
ers like her support for the minimum wage,
FDP voters like her stability. Germany is a
very centrist country (see chart); Mrs Mer-
kel suﬃces it. 
When she chooses to, she can move
quickly. Witness that closure of the nuclear
plants, or her support for three Greek bail-
outs. Witness her decision to welcome
more than 1m refugees and other asylum-
seekers in the summer of 2015. The ﬁrst of
these spooked business, the second upset
many of the CDU’s conservative suppor-
ters. The third, though, now often seen as
the most controversial, was at the time
widely applauded. 
As the refugee crisis of 2015 built up, Mrs
Merkel dithered: it was the year that “mer-
keln”, meaning to put oﬀ big decisions by
doing and saying little, was added to the
country’s vocabulary. By the end of August
thousands of refugees were squeezing on
to westbound trains in Hungary and trudg-
ing along Austrian motorways towards
Munich. The chancellor found herself left
with a blunt choice between letting them
in and seeing ugly images of German bor-
der guards forcibly repelling men, women
and children. She and the public knew
which option they preferred. Closing the
borders would have “upset a large major-
ity of citizens”, according to Robin Alex-
ander, a journalist for Die Welt who has
written a book on that
time. Crowds
cheered the arrivals at Munich’s station. 
Mrs Merkel’s decision mixed a concern
for public opinion, demographic consider-
ations (an ageing society needs immi-
grants) and deep conviction (growing up
behind the Berlin Wall taught her the evil
of sealed borders) into a characteristic
blend of ﬂannel and political nous, con-
ﬂict-aversion and moral rectitude. But it
stretched Mr Spahn’s assertion that “the
chancellor only prefers to take risks when
she is conﬁdent she can control them.” The
inﬂux alienated the conservative CSU and
fuelled the rise of the right-wing, populist
Alternative for Germany party. As the
number of refugees rose the chancellor’s
popularity tumbled; the 
international
press pushed out premature political obit-
uaries. But she recovered her standing as
the rate of new arrivals fell, thanks partly
to a murky deal with Recep Tayyip Erdo-
gan, the president of Turkey, which traded
money and visas for refugee repatriation.
“There can and shall not be another year
like 2015,” she told a cheering CSU rally on
August 25th.
In so far as Mrs Merkel’s reaction to the
refugee crisis was a departure from her
usual timid style, it points to a curious con-
trast between her domestic and interna-
tional outlook. At home she does little to 

1

Asse t Managemen t
Wea l th Managemen t 
Asse t Se rv ices

Hong Kong: +852 3191 1805
Singapore:   +65 6536 1805
group.pictet

18 Br ieﬁng Angela Merkel

International woman of myster y

2 shore up the economy against the pres-
sures of tomorrow; looking abroad she
worries deeply about the future of the mul-
tilateral global order which has made to-
day’s prosperous Germany possible. 
Among her favourite books are one that
describes the rise of 19th-century globalisa-
tion ( Jürgen Osterhammel’s “The Transfor-
mation of the World”) and one that nar-
rates its collapse in 1914 (Christopher
Clark’s “The Sleepwalkers”). Mrs Merkel’s
commitment to protecting rules-based glo-
balisation is evident in her close involve-
ment in climate talks, which began at a
1995 summit in Germany when she was
the CDU’s environment minister. It was
also present in her successful diplomatic
push for European sanctions on Russia.
The chancellor’s detached demeanour
serves her well in negotiations. She turns
up at
international summits well in-
formed; she keeps her cool. The logo for the
G20 summit hosted in Hamburg was a reef
knot—a fastening the purpose of which is
to pull together a loose bundle, and which
gets tighter the more its loose ends are
pulled. At the summit she worked closely
with countries similarly fearful for the glo-
bal order, most notably China, which
joined Germany in sidelining America to
reaﬃrm the importance of climate action.
When the Pew Research Centre asked
people in 37 countries about various world
leaders this spring, Mrs Merkel was the
only one in whom more people expressed
conﬁdence than a lack of conﬁdence. With
America incoherent, Britain in isolationist
retreat and France led by a new and untest-
ed president, some describe Mrs Merkel as
the West’s new de facto leader. But that de-
mands too much of her. Germany has a
strong economy and a capable chancellor.
But it remains reliant on America for its de-
fence, however much Mrs Merkel rolls her
eyes at Donald Trump. As Ian Bremmer of
the Eurasia Group, a consultancy, puts it,
Mrs Merkel “understands that she will

have to manage a leaderless environment,
but she is not prepared to become the
leader of the free world”. 
Indeed, Mrs Merkel frets about whether
a European country “with few natural re-
sources and an ageing population”, as one
of her aides puts it, can stay relevant at all.
She worries about the absence of Euro-
pean technology champions. Germany
and Europe are becoming smaller and rela-
tively poorer in the world, she observes,
telling an audience in Berlin on August
23rd that some 80m Germans are not “per
se” important to the Chinese or Indians. 
So German foreign policy plays out as a
conﬂict between rising international de-
mands and the chancellor’s essential traits:
her distrust of ideology, her reactiveness
and her detachment. Throughout the euro-
zone crisis, for example, Germany dragged
its feet on proposals to help southern Eu-
rope’s struggling economies, but made
concessions at the last possible moment
rather than allow Greece to fall out of the
system—as her CDU ﬁnance minister, Wolf-
gang Schäuble, would have preferred.
Though the currency bloc has recovered,
its ability to survive another challenge
without greater common governance and
burden-sharing is uncertain. In France, Em-
manuel Macron supports such reforms.
That challenges Mrs Merkel to say where
she stands. 
For now she has remained warm but
ominously non-committal. On the French
president’s ﬁrst oﬃcial visit in May she
welcomed him with a line of poetry from
Hermann Hesse: “Jedem Anfang wohnt
ein Zauber inne” (A magic dwells in each
beginning). She has backed his proposal
for a euro-zone ﬁnance minister and great-
er common investments; insiders say she
wants to harmonise the corporate-tax rates
of the two countries. But a ﬁnance minister
with what powers? Investments on what
scale, paid for by what mechanisms? And
is this the same tax harmonisation that has

The Economist September 9th 2017

been promised for years? Answers come
there none, at least so far. 
Another case study is Germany’s grow-
ing contribution to international security.
The country now has troops deployed in
Afghanistan, Mali and Lithuania, where it
leads NATO’s military mission. And it has
launched a new “Marshall Plan” of invest-
ments and co-operation in sub-Saharan Af-
rica, spending some €4bn more to help
prevent future refugee crises. All of this
would have been unthinkable a few years
ago, observes Wolfgang Ischinger of the
Munich Security Conference. Moreover,
the chancellor has made a commitment to
raising defence spending from 1.2% of GDP
to the NATO target of 2%—a diﬀerence of
some €25bn ($30bn) a year by 2024.
Question-marks remain, however. That
fewer sub-Saharan Africans are making it
to Germany is a product of Italian military
and intelligence operations in the Mediter-
ranean and Libya, not the Marshall Plan.
And Germans seem to have little appetite
for some of the international responsibil-
ities the country already has, let alone new
ones it might accrue. According to a poll by
the Pew Research Centre in June, just 38%
would want to use force to defend a NATO
ally under any sort of attack. The closest
Mrs Merkel has come to confronting her
compatriots with the new realities was
when, in May, she told a crowd in Munich:
“The time when we could entirely rely on
others is somewhat over.” Yet this cryptic
comment is better seen as a way of distanc-
ing herself from Mr Trump than as new for-
eign-policy direction. 

Rise up singing
Challenged by a journalist in August 2015
to specify what she still wanted to achieve
as chancellor, Mrs Merkel oﬀered only plat-
itudes about wanting to fulﬁl her duty. Two
years, a refugee crisis, the advent of Mr
Trump and a federal-election campaign
later, she has still not answered the ques-
tion. Mrs Merkel’s CDU manifesto is a per-
functory list of modest correctives, like
15,000 more police oﬃcers, increased child
beneﬁt, a new digitisation tsar and tighter
rules on dual citizenship. 
“Enjoy the summer. Vote right in the au-
tumn”, says a CDU poster of a woman
snoozing in a sun-dappled meadow. But
then what? One day, Mrs Merkel’s time
will pass. “I don’t want to be a half-dead
wreck when I leave politics,” she said be-
fore she became chancellor. When she
steps down, if indeed she does, her party
will face an uncertain future: she has built
up few potential successors. So will her
country, with its emergent diplomatic heft
bound up with her individual contacts and
methods she has picked up. All that will go
with her. Germany has enjoyed a long
summer living well and gladly under Mrs
Merkel’s irenic inaction. Clouds ﬂeck the
blue horizon. 7

Asia

The Koreas

A bomb for a bomb

S E O U L

that they can entrust their security to
America. A poll by the Pew Research Cen-
tre in June found that 78% of South Koreans
have no conﬁdence in Donald Trump to
“do the right thing” in world aﬀairs. His re-
sponse to the latest test will have done lit-
tle to assuage these fears. James Mattis, his
defence secretary, warned Mr Kim that a
threat
to America or its allies would
prompt “a massive military response”. But
Mr Trump, who had earlier mused about
ditching a free-trade agreement with South
Korea, chose instead to criticise Moon
Jae-in, the South’s president, who has
called for talks with the North. “South Ko-
rea is ﬁnding, as I have told them, that their
talk of appeasement with North Korea will
not work,” he tweeted. For Mark Fitzpat-
rick of the International Institute for Strate-
gic Studies, a think-tank, “that was exactly
the wrong response.”

South Koreans want to bolster their own military capabilities in response to the
North’s nuclear test
THE runaway pace of North Korea’s nuc-
lear development has confounded pre-
dictions and diverted the attention of
world leaders. It is also meddling with one
North Korean grandmother’s retirement
plans. Ri Chun Hee, a veteran broadcaster
at Korean Central Television, was prom-
ised a rest in 2012, after 41 years gleefully
reading out propaganda. The 74-year-old
would only return for signiﬁcant an-
nouncements. Yet these now come most
weeks. North Korea has already tested 22
missiles this year. On September 3rd Mrs Ri
was back, claiming the regime had tested a
hydrogen bomb (see next story). It was, she
declared with trademark exuberance, the
“perfect” explosion.
Mrs Ri is not the only cold war relic that
could be put back into service as a result of
the test. Some South Koreans want Ameri-
ca to show its support by moving nuclear
weapons back to their country. The White
House put 950 of them there after the Kore-
an war, but withdrew them in 1991. Soon af-
terwards both Koreas agreed to keep nuc-
lear weapons oﬀ the peninsula. But the
North has long ﬂouted the deal, testing its
ﬁrst bomb 11 years ago. Liberty Korea, the
South’s biggest opposition party, called in
August for the weapons to be redeployed.
Hong Joon-pyo, its leader, reiterated the de-
mand two days after the latest test.
South Koreans are growing less certain

Not ﬁckle, but ﬁssile
Mr Hong argues that redeploying nuclear
weapons would be proof of America’s will
to defend the South. Several conservative
newspapers have endorsed the notion.
One big one, Joongang Ilbo, said the move
would “raise our trust
in the United
States”. A poll in August found that only
27% of South Koreans favour keeping their
country nuclear-free. On September 4th
Song Young-moo, the defence minister,

The Economist September 9th 2017 19

Also in this section
20 North Korea’s nuclear leap forward
21 Atrocities against the Rohingyas
21 Suppressing dissent in Cambodia
22 Bangladesh v Pakistan
24 Banyan: Pakistan’s romance with
China

For daily analysis and debate on Asia, visit
Economist.com/asia

said asking for the weapons was “one al-
ternative” that should be reviewed. He
mentioned public demand for the idea in a
recent meeting with Mr Mattis.
Another option is for South Korea to ac-
quire its own nuclear weapons. It tried this
twice in the 1970s but was pressed by
America to stop. Experts believe it could
have its own bomb within three years if it
chose to do so. Most South Koreans have
been keen on the idea for two decades. An-
other paper, Chosun Ilbo, said the govern-
ment must consider it: “A nuclear threat
must be met with a nuclear deterrent.
There is no other option.” 
Yet South Korea will probably remain
nuclear-free. Making its own bombs could
jeopardise the alliance with America and
risk sanctions for violating the nuclear
non-proliferation treaty of 1968. Mr Moon
and his party continue to oppose asking
the Americans for some of theirs. Even if
they change their minds, American gener-
als are unlikely to back such a scheme. 
America has plenty of nuclear weap-
ons capable of striking the North—from
submarines, bases on Guam or even the
American mainland. Putting them in the
South would antagonise China and Russia
just as America is trying to enlist their help
to press the North to abandon its drive for
long-range nuclear weapons. This week at
the United Nations, America circulated a
resolution that would bar exports of oil to
North Korea, most of which come from
China, and which is the one plausible
means left to rein in the North. “From an
American perspective, it [deploying nuc-
lear weapons in the South] is unnecessary
and dangerous,” says David Straub, a for-
mer American diplomat now at the Sejong
Institute, another think-tank. 
Mr Moon is far more likely to boost con-

1

20 Asia

The Economist September 9th 2017

2 ventional defences. He has reversed his
earlier opposition to THAAD, an American
anti-missile system. Four more launchers
were installed soon after the latest test. Mr
Moon has also persuaded Mr Trump to lift
a limit on the range and payload of its (non-
nuclear) missiles, allowing the South’s
army to deploy more powerful ones, eg,
able to destroy bunkers. 
“Kim Jong Un must not be allowed to
sleep easy,” cried Chosun Ilbo, referring to
the North’s leader. Mr Moon hopes to per-
suade South Koreans that they, at any rate,
still can. That should be relatively easy. By
mid-week a qualifying match for the foot-
ball World Cup had bumped North Korea
from the top three search terms on Naver,
South Korea’s answer to Google. Pass-
ers-by in Gwanghwamun, a square in the
centre of Seoul, were not fretting about an
imminent apocalypse. Asked to judge the
current atmosphere in the capital, a mid-
dle-aged man replied, “The pollution isn’t
as bad these days.” 7

North Korea’s nuclear weapons

Almost there

The rogue state’s missile programme is
advancing much faster than expected
KIM JONG UN, North Korea’s leader, has
made no secret of his goal of develop-
ing a nuclear-tipped missile with enough
range to destroy cities in America. What
has confounded many experts is the speed
at which his engineers are getting there.
Only last year the consensus was that they
would not succeed before 2020; now the
target seems achievable within a year.
If North Korea’s sixth nuclear test, on
September 3rd, was of a two-stage nuclear
device small enough to ﬁt on a Hwasong-14
intercontinental ballistic missile (ICBM), as
it claims, that marks a big advance over the
previous nuclear test a year ago. The re-
gime claimed that test, too, was of a two-
stage device (also known as a thermo-
nuclear or hydrogen bomb), in which an
initial nuclear explosion is used to amplify
a second one. But estimates of its yield (ex-
plosive power) varied between 10 and 30
kilotons, which even at the higher end is
too little for a hydrogen bomb. David Al-
bright, the president of the Institute for Sci-
ence and International Security, a think-
tank, believes that the North had instead
tested a “boosted ﬁssion” device, in which
lithium, deuterium and tritium are placed
at the centre of a single-stage bomb, to in-
crease its yield with a bit of fusion. 
The most recent test was calculated by
NORSAR, a Norwegian seismic agency, to
have had a yield of about 120 kilotons, or

about eight times that of the ﬁfth test (see
chart). That would be quite low for a two-
stage thermonuclear device of the kind
North Korea would like the outside world
to believe it has developed, but not too
powerful for it to have been a boosted ﬁs-
sion device. 
The day before the test, Mr Kim was pic-
tured posing in front of a peanut-shaped
container (almost certainly a plausible
mock-up), with each end of the shell sup-
posedly holding one of the device’s two
stages. The oﬃcial statement suggested
that the test was of a device that could be
adjusted to produce explosions that range
between tens of kilotons and hundreds.
That is a tricky feat to master, but a conve-
nient way of explaining the relatively low
yield for a genuine thermonuclear device. 
Jeﬀrey Lewis of the Middlebury Insti-
tute of International Studies sees no rea-
son to doubt North Korea’s claims. He ar-
gues that, based on the experience of other
countries, six tests is more than enough to
develop a thermonuclear device. Mr Al-
bright remains more sceptical that the
North has mastered two-stage technology.
That matters, he says, because single-stage
devices have a limited yield (even boosted-
ﬁssion ones), whereas the power of a two-
stage warhead is immense. With the latter,
even with a relatively inaccurate guidance
system, an entire city could be destroyed
by a single missile. Either way, says Mark
Fitzpatrick of the International Institute for
Strategic Studies (IISS), the North Koreans
will have learned a lot from the latest test
and will probably have a true thermonuc-
lear capability sooner rather than later. 
If the story of North Korea’s path to a
hydrogen warhead has been one of pre-
dictable, albeit accelerating, progress, the
same cannot be said of the rapid advance it
has made in long-range missiles over the
past two years. Its intermediate-range (up
to 4,000km) Musudan missile, which is
also known as the Hwasong-10, had failed
in six out of seven tests, the most recent in
October last year. Yet since May, North Ko-
rea has twice successfully tested both the
intermediate-range Hwasong-12 and the
Hwasong-14.
Michael Elleman of the IISS says that no
other country has advanced from a medi-
um-range capability to an ICBM in such a
short
time. In a report published last
month, he argues that the reason for the
startling breakthrough was that North Ko-
rea had quite suddenly got hold of much
better, more reliable rocket engines.
Mr Elleman believes that the Hwa-
song-12 and -14 are powered by versions of
a high-performance Soviet missile engine
known as the RD-250 which the North has
acquired by stealth. Mr Elleman says that
North Korea could not have developed
and manufactured such large rocket mo-
tors, which generate 40 tonnes of thrust,
from scratch. The only outﬁts with a his-

Testing boundar ies

Nor th Korea
Missile launches

Leaders:
Kim Il Sung
Kim Jong Il
Kim Jong Un

1984

90

95 2000 05

10

1517

Nuclear tests

Estimated yield, kilotons of TNT

25

20

15

10

5

0

Oct 06
1-2

May 09
2.4

Feb 13
~6-9

Jan 16
~7-10

Sep 16
~15

Sep 17
~120

Sources: CSIS; Norsar; The Economist

tory of producing this type of engine are
Energomash in Russia and KB Yuzhnoye in
Ukraine.
The latter has fallen on hard times, par-
ticularly since 2014, when Russian-backed
separatists seized nearby parts of eastern
Ukraine. Even before that, in 2011, North
Korea had been caught trying to procure
missile parts from KB Yuzhnoye. Mr Elle-
man reckons that, amid the chaos in the
surrounding area, the North Koreans may
now have succeeded, with the help of dis-
gruntled employees or corruptible guards,
in acquiring a “few dozen” RD-250 engines
and transporting them home by train (they
are only about two metres high and a me-
tre wide). 
Mr Lewis, among others, questions Mr
Elleman’s theory and suggests that the
North Koreans could have sought help
from Iran, or that their own indigenous
skills are being underestimated. The Bull-
etin of Atomic Scientists, however, agrees
with Mr Elleman both about the type of
engine and its probable source. Whoever is
right, what is not in doubt is the sudden
leap forward this year of North Korea’s
missile programme. 
The one piece of the jigsaw still needed
to produce a credible nuclear-armed ICBM
is a re-entry vehicle that will protect the
warhead during its descent through the
earth’s atmosphere. The re-entry vehicle
attached to the second Hwasong-14 that
was tested appeared to burn up in the ter-
minal phase of its ﬂight. But even if North
Korea does not yet have one that can with-
stand the speed at which an ICBM travels,
neither Mr Fitzpatrick nor Mr Elleman
thinks building one will be an insuperable
obstacle to engineers who have come this
far this fast. North Korea’s nuclear-weap-
ons programme is not quite there yet, but it
is getting very close. 7

The Economist September 9th 2017 

Atrocities against the Rohingyas

Scorched earth

G H U M D U M , A Z A K H A Y A A N D S H A H P O R I R DW I P 

A state-led massacre in Myanmar’s
Rakhine state triggers an exodus
ACROSS the border, inside Myanmar,
columns of smoke can be seen rising at
dawn; each evening dusk reveals the ﬁres
at their bases. All week villages have been
burning in northern Rakhine state, home
of the Rohingyas, a persecuted Muslim mi-
nority. Refugees have been ﬂeeing to Ban-
gladesh across rice paddies, along muddy
mountain paths and in boats over the Naf
river, which divides the two countries.
They are ﬂeeing systematic violence from
the Burmese army and armed mobs of
Rakhines, another local ethnic group. The
UN has counted 164,000 who have already
arrived in Bangladesh; many more are
thought to be on their way.
At the end of the Myanmar-Bangladesh
Friendship Road, backed against the bor-
der fence near the town of Ghumdum, is a
rapidly growing, makeshift camp holding
some 5,000 new refugees. A Bangladeshi
border guard points to a nearby hillock
where a ﬁre is raging; he says the Burmese
army is burning down houses. Nurul Is-
lam, a 30-year-old farmer, says he left his
home in Razabil village in Myanmar last
week when soldiers opened ﬁre on villag-
ers and set the houses on ﬁre. Women and
men were separated. Soldiers raped his 13-
year-old sister Khadiza; mobs of Rakhines
armed with swords mutilated her body.
His father was also killed.
Fatima Khatun managed to escape her
burning village and arrived in Bangladesh
on September 4th with eight members of
her family. She says many children and old

people died on the week-long trek through
the muddy monsoon-soaked hills. When
she and others crossed a river inside Myan-
mar by clinging to bamboo rafts, soldiers
opened ﬁre on them. Many more villagers
are hiding in Myanmar or have lost their
way, she says.
At a nearby petrol station, Mohammad
Jahangir explains that he has just arrived
from the town of Taung Bazaar after a 13-
day march. He is carrying his 8-year-old
son, who cannot walk because of a bullet
wound on his right leg. 
Matthew Smith of Fortify Rights, an
NGO, says that based on copious, detailed
testimony from many witnesses, “We can
now say with a high level of conﬁdence
that state-led security forces and local
armed residents have committed mass kill-
ings.” It looks, says Mr Smith, as if the Bur-
mese army is trying to drive all Rohingyas
out of the country. Fortify Rights has docu-
mented many cases of indiscriminate kill-
ing, rape, mutilation and other crimes.
To the south of Ghumdum, at another
border crossing, locals reckon 5,000 refu-
gees have arrived that morning alone. One
member of the exhausted procession is
Sawza (who goes by one name), a health
worker from the town of Buthidaung. She
left her home on August 25th, the day the
Burmese army went on the rampage in re-
sponse to attacks by Rohingya militants
that killed 12 policemen. At ﬁrst, Sawza
thought it would be safe for her family to
stay. But when she heard that Zabar Khali-
mullah, a wealthy local, had been killed,
she decided to ﬂee. Unlike during another
bout of violence last year, aﬄuent land-
owning Rohingyas are leaving this time.
Sawza says that during her 15-day journey
she saw parents forced to abandon chil-
dren who were too weak to keep walking
and a man in his 50s who had to leave his
80-year-old father by the wayside. 
Even farther south, on the beach at

Many more did not make it

Asia 21

Shah Porir Dwip, the southernmost tip of
Bangladesh, Roshida Begum climbs out of
a wooden boat with a few belongings and
what is left of her family. Burmese soldiers
took away her daughters, who were 16 and
22, she says. She later found their mutilated
bodies. Her husband was also killed. Far-
ther along the beach is another group of 30
or so Rohingyas, who spent ﬁve days hid-
ing in the hills before crossing to Bangla-
desh. Obaida Khatun, the oldest woman in
the group, says that three of the young
women with her were raped.
The narrow strip of Bangladesh that
juts into the Bay of Bengal alongside Myan-
mar already hosts hundreds of thousands
of Rohingya refugees from previous exo-
duses, in 1978 and 1991-92. They compete
with locals for food, ﬁrewood, land and
jobs. It is the poorest part of Bangladesh.
Literacy in the region is 27%. Aid is arriving
in dribs and drabs—food, water puriﬁers,
tarpaulins—but not nearly enough. Among
the throngs of refugees looking for shelter
in the area this week was Zainab Begum,
whose father was killed by Burmese sol-
diers. “Everything has turned to ashes,”
she says. 7

Politics in Cambodia

Closing time

P H N O M P E N H

The government is crushing its
opponents ahead of elections next year
THE newsroom of the Cambodia Daily is
littered with piles of proofs, pens with-
out lids, an empty bottle of Tabasco sauce,
a cat frolicking under the strip lighting—but
no journalists. The country’s most promi-
nent independent newspaper printed its ﬁ-
nal edition on September 4th, after the au-
thorities suddenly presented it with an
unpayable tax bill of $6.3m. The move
forms part of a ﬁerce new campaign
against the government’s detractors ahead
of elections due in July. Cambodia’s de-
mocracy, if not dead, is dying. 
The largely foreign journalists of the
Cambodia Daily managed to cover one last
important story. Early on September 3rd
Kem Sokha (pictured on next page), leader
of the Cambodia National Rescue Party
(CNRP), the country’s main opposition,
was arrested for treason with the help of
100 police. He now languishes in the miser-
able conﬁnes of a remote prison near the
border with Vietnam. As evidence of his al-
leged crime, the government is pointing,
absurdly, to a four-year-old video of a
speech in which he explains that he has re-
ceived American advice about how to pro-
vide eﬀective democratic opposition. If
convicted, he faces as much as 30 years in 

1

22 Asia

The Economist September 9th 2017

Bangladesh v Pakistan

East overtakes west

stretches further in Pakistan than in
Bangladesh because prices in the former
tend to be lower. So Pakistan’s $1,470 per
person actually has more purchasing
power than Bangladesh’s $1,538. 
This is nonetheless a good moment to
celebrate Bangladesh’s economic pro-
gress. Its annual growth has averaged
more than 6% over the past ten years and
has run above 7% over the past two.
Industry accounts for 29% of its GDP. A
country that once lacked cloth for
shrouds now exports more ready-made
garments than India and Pakistan com-
bined. Working conditions are still far
worse than they should be. They are also
far better than they once were. 
Bangladesh’s GDP per person re-
ceived a boost from another source. Its
last census, in 2011, led to a large revision
of the country’s population, larger even
than Pakistan’s. But in Bangladesh’s case,
the revision was downwards. 

Bangladesh’s GDP per person is now higher than Pakistan’s
WHEN Bangladesh won indepen-
dence from Pakistan in 1971, it was
much poorer than the country it left.
Industry accounted for only 6-7% of its
GDP, compared with over 20% in Paki-
stan. The battle for independence had
killed or displaced millions, damaged
roads and railways, and severed ties with
Pakistan’s bankers and industrialists
(including the owner of one of the
world’s biggest jute mills). Even before
the war, Bangladesh had been trampled
by another apocalyptic horseman: a
cyclone killed hundreds of thousands in
1970. The country’s independence leader,
Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, complained
that West Pakistan had not promptly
shared its bumper wheat crop or “given a
yard of cloth for our shrouds”. 
Last month revealed a remarkable
turnaround. Bangladesh’s GDP per per-
son is now higher than Pakistan’s. Con-
verted into dollars at market exchange
rates, it was $1,538 in the past ﬁscal year
(which ended on June 30th). Pakistan’s
was about $1,470.
Strange as it may sound, Bangladesh
jumped ahead because of an advance in
Pakistan. On August 25th Pakistan re-
leased the results of its census, updating
earlier population estimates. They
showed that the country has 207.8m
people, more than 9m more than previ-
ously thought. It may now have the ﬁfth
biggest population in the world, surpass-
ing Brazil’s. But the new count also
lopped 4-5% oﬀ Pakistan’s GDP per per-
son, the arithmetic consequence of re-
vealing so many more people.
A caveat should be noted. A dollar

Pakistan:

More bucks for Bangladesh

GDP per person, $’000

Current pr ices and market exchange rates

old census
new census

1.6

1.4

1.2

1.0

0.8

0.6

Bangladesh

2008 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17*

Sources: Haver Analytics; national statistics

*Forecast

mestic and foreign, can easily be shut
down for purported partisanship. 
Western governments criticise such in-
justices, but events elsewhere in Asia are
proving a distraction. America expressed
“grave concern” at Mr Kem Sokha’s arrest;
Mr Hun Sen retorted that it was defending
its “puppet”. China, which has become
Cambodia’s biggest source of aid, says it
supports the government. Analysts specu-
late that it may also be oﬀering advice on
how to curb opposition, particularly on-
line, given the sophisticated nature of re-
cent repression. Jodie DeJonge, the former
editor of the Cambodia Daily, points out
that using a tax bill to silence the (loss-mak-
ing) newspaper was particularly shrewd.
European and American oﬃcials have
been telling the government to pursue
evaders more vigorously for years. 

As it stands, there is no chance that the
election in July will be either free or fair.
The CNRP hopes to soldier on without a
new leader—assuming the courts allow it.
The government may intend to put it out of
business altogether; it has issued vague
threats against other senior ﬁgures within
the party. “Even if people don’t vote for the
prime minister next year there won’t be
any other choices,” reckons Phil Robertson
of Human Rights Watch, a charity. So when
it comes to Cambodia’s callow democracy,
what will the end look like? Phnom Penh’s
Peace Palace, Mr Hun Sen’s oﬃce, oﬀers
one vision of the future. The huge ediﬁce,
lined with colonnades, towers behind
gates and guards on a busy boulevard in
the centre of the city. It dominates the
street, the sky and the view of anyone who
dares to look up. 7

There goes another opposition leader

2 prison; the CNRP could be dissolved. 
Lord Prime Minister and Supreme Mili-
tary Commander Hun Sen, as Cambodia’s
leader likes to be known, has been in pow-
er since 1985. Bloody protests occurred after
a bitter election four years ago in which his
Cambodian People’s Party (CPP) lost
ground to the newly formed CNRP. Since
then dozens of activists, politicians and
critics have found themselves behind bars.
A tough cybercrime law has landed others
in trouble for posts on social-media sites.
The previous head of the CNRP, Sam
Rainsy, has been hounded out of the coun-
try by spurious criminal charges. Most
gravely Kem Ley, once acting head of the
CNRP, was shot dead over his morning cof-
fee 14 months ago. His killer, who claims he
acted over an unpaid debt of $3,000, was
sentenced to life imprisonment in March
after a superﬁcial investigation.
Yet this intimidation does not seem to
have scared voters. At local elections in
June the opposition won 46% of the popu-
lar vote to the ruling party’s 51% (a similar
result as in the parliamentary election of
2013). Hence the events of recent days.
The pretext of preventing foreign med-
dling is being used as a means to strangle
dissent more broadly. In July the govern-
ment sent legal ultimatums to two organi-
sations participating in an election-moni-
toring consortium, demanding that they
withdraw. In August local radio stations
were banned from broadcasting Voice of
America and Radio Free Asia—two interna-
tional news services funded by America’s
government. Broadcasts on at least 32 radio
frequencies have been taken oﬀ air. The
National Democratic Institute, an Ameri-
can democracy-building NGO, also re-
ceived sudden orders to close. An ambigu-
ous law passed two years ago means other
pressure groups and charities, both do-

24 Asia

The Economist September 9th 2017

Banyan

Sweeter than honey

Chinese investment is a boon for Pakistan, though it carries risks

American think-tank, improving transport links through the
mountainous neck of land that joins Pakistan to Xinjiang prov-
ince in China’s far west is one of CPEC’s lesser aims. Yes, Gwadar,
as a port on the Indian Ocean, interests the Chinese navy, but
would have done so regardless of CPEC. Most of CPEC’s invest-
ments are aimed at improving Pakistan’s domestic economy.
China does have strategic motives, of course. A more dynamic
Pakistan would certainly act as a counterbalance to the deepen-
ing security relationship between India and America, which also
provides military aid to Pakistan. Then there is Islamist militancy,
which spills back into Xinjiang; development might, as Li Ke-
qiang, China’s prime minister, put it, “wean the populace from
fundamentalism”. China needs new markets for its products, as
well as new terrain for infrastructure and industrial projects.
Most importantly, CPEC has become the main plank of Mr Xi’s
ambitious “belt-and-road” initiative, whereby improved infra-
structure will help to strengthen economic ties and thus spread
China’s inﬂuence through Asia and beyond. As Mr Small points
out, CPEC has to be seen to work for the broader scheme to seem
both credible and appealing.
Even if CPEC is not the neo-imperialist exercise its critics make
it out to be, it still has its ﬂaws. The IMF warns that Pakistan may
struggle to repay China’s loans, which could in turn prompt a bal-
ance-of-payments crisis. Pakistan’s central bankers have in the
past deplored a lack of transparency surrounding CPEC contracts;
suspicion abounds that Pakistani taxpayers have been short-
changed. And security is a problem. Just one example is the new
Chinese-funded road to Gwadar, which runs through an area
long gripped by insurgency in the remote, backward province of
Balochistan. Mr Iqbal argues that the road and the development it
is bringing will help extinguish the conﬂict. It might equally pour
fuel on it, if locals feel excluded. 

Human ties
In opinion polls, Pakistanis have high regard for the Chinese. A
ﬁlm released in April, “Chalay Thay Saath”, depicts a cross-bor-
der love story. It throws together—at a graveyard along the high-
way connecting the two countries—a Chinese man (played by a
Canadian), whose father had worked as a road-builder in Paki-
stan, and a young Pakistani doctor on her way to visit her father in
the far north. Despite the vicissitudes of landslides, family emer-
gencies and communicating via a language app, the couple end
up marrying. 
In real life, most Pakistanis have never met a Chinese. That
will change, as the number of Chinese residents swells from
around 30,000 today. In Gwadar locals gripe about the tight secu-
rity at the port, for the beneﬁt of Chinese workers, who do all the
construction and who keep to themselves. A politician com-
plains that “they do not even buy a single needle in the market.”
In Islamabad, the Ni Hao (“Hello”) Chinese supermarket
stocks pork, to the disgust of a Pakistani working there. He gripes
that before long everything will come from China. Over the past
year massage parlours have sprung up in swanky parts of town.
Chinese women are starting to walk about the conservative capi-
tal in short skirts and shorts. As one local notes, “People are be-
coming very aggressive, saying, ‘What the fuck is that? This is a
Muslim country.’ ” Pakistan’s elites may be enthralled by the idea
that Chinese investment might make their country stronger, but
among the masses, the romance has not really taken hold. The
ﬁlm, at any rate, ﬂopped. 7

NEVER mind that the two countries’ slogan factory has always
been based in China, or that it started oﬀ with some truly
clunky products. What matters is that Communist China and
Pakistan have a joint venture churning out declarations of friend-
ship that date back almost to the two states’ respective founding,
some seven decades ago. China and Pakistan have long hailed
each other as “all-weather friends”, or “iron brothers” as close as
“lips and teeth”. The mutual bond is, leaders from both countries
aﬃrm, “higher than the Himalayas, deeper than the deepest
ocean, and sweeter than honey”. 
And then, from China, come the lover’s gifts. Never has Paki-
stan been so wooed. The original promised dowry, of $46bn in
Chinese grants and soft loans for infrastructure projects, has only
grown, to $62bn. This muniﬁcence is dubbed the China-Pakistan
Economic Corridor (CPEC), launched amid fanfare in 2015, on a
visit to Pakistan by President Xi Jinping. 
Most of the money is earmarked for power plants to improve
Pakistan’s notoriously unreliable electricity supply. The rest is go-
ing on roads, railways, dams, industrial zones, agricultural enter-
prises, warehousing, pipelines and a deepwater port in the coast-
al settlement of Gwadar. Some of the promised money is bound
not to materialise, and the claim by the interior minister, Ahsan
Iqbal, of “benchmarking” Singapore and Hong Kong when turn-
ing remote, dusty Gwadar into a container-shipping hub speaks
more of hope than experience. Yet over $14bn has already been
spent. CPEC is very diﬀerent from earlier schemes, when co-oper-
ation was promised only to run into the sands.
For Pakistan, the scale of ambition is unprecedented—a
“game- and fate-changer” as overwrought locals put it. If CPEC
gets electricity and goods ﬂowing eﬃciently, then growth could
jump by over two percentage points a year, by one estimate. Bet-
ter yet, CPEC could shift the national narrative—too often domin-
ated by coups, extremists and a chippy kind of nationalism—to-
wards economic construction.
What is in it for China is often misunderstood, especially by Si-
nophobes in Delhi, Tokyo and Washington. They make much of
the “corridor” in the plan, concluding that China’s chief aim is to
gain access to the Indian Ocean, the better to encircle India. In
fact, argues Andrew Small of the German Marshall Fund, an

China

The Economist September 9th 2017 25

Also in this section
26 Bookshops turn cool

Politics

All the president’s men?

The signals, however, will be hard to read.
Around half of the nearly 400 mem-
bers of the Central Committee will be re-
placed, as will about two-ﬁfths of the Polit-
buro. New military chiefs will be
appointed, too. But most attention will fo-
cus on who makes it into the Politburo’s
Standing Committee. Five of its seven
members are due to retire, including Wang
Qishan, Mr Xi’s one ﬁrm supporter in the
group, who is in charge of his anti-corrup-
tion campaign. There has been specula-
tion that he may keep Mr Wang on. To do
so would breach convention but no rules.
However, retaining Mr Wang would not,
by itself, prove that Mr Xi is strong. It could
suggest that he lacks other close allies
whom he trusts to do the politically dan-
gerous job of ﬁghting graft.

A date has been announced at last for a crucial Communist Party conclave. It will
oﬀer clues to China’s future
CHINA’S elite have long had to keep
their diaries clear for much of Septem-
ber, October and November, waiting for a
date to be announced for a ﬁve-yearly con-
gress of the ruling Communist Party. At
last, it has been revealed. The red carpets
will be rolled out and the skies turned blue
(by shutting down factories and keeping
cars oﬀ the roads) on October 18th. It will
be the 19th such gathering since the party
was founded in 1921. At the meeting, some
2,300 hand-picked delegates will choose a
new Central Committee which will then
hold its own conclave to reshuﬄe mem-
bership of the country’s most powerful de-
cision-making bodies. The line-up has
been largely settled during months of se-
cretive horse-trading. Rumours abound
about who has made the cut. 
The president, party chief and supreme
commander of the armed forces, Xi Jin-
ping, certainly has. He has already served
ﬁve years as the party’s general secretary. If
he sticks to precedent, he has another ﬁve
years to go (though some believe he wants
to keep the job longer than the usual de-
cade). This meeting will give Mr Xi his ﬁrst
chance to implement sweeping changes of
personnel at the very top of the party—his
predecessors selected the 25 members of
the current Politburo at the previous con-
gress in 2012. It is widely expected that this
gathering will oﬀer clues as to how eﬀec-
tively Mr Xi has consolidated his power
since then and what he plans to do with it.

Isn’t Xi great
It is likely that the new Standing Commit-
tee will contain more Xi loyalists. But the
problem for outsiders is that, even when
the new men (and they will almost certain-
ly all be men) are paraded before journal-
ists at the end of the meetings, it may still
be hard to calculate how much additional
clout Mr Xi will enjoy. Factional alle-
giances are often ill-deﬁned. Mr Xi is a
stickler for secrecy. 
It is not yet known how, or whether, the
congress will change the party’s constitu-
tion to recognise Mr Xi’s contributions to
Communist ideology. If it rules that the

For daily analysis and debate on China, visit
Economist.com/china

party should be guided by “Xi Jinping
Thought”, that would suggest he has
gained enormous power (the only other
leader acknowledged to have Thought
with a capital T is Mao Zedong). If the term
chosen is “Xi Jinping Theory”, that would
place him on a par with Deng Xiaoping—
not bad either. Avoiding being elevated to
Mao’s level may simply reﬂect good judg-
ment on Mr Xi’s part. Diehard Mao fans
would be appalled by his hubris should he
claim to have Thought, too.
Assuming that Mr Xi does emerge
stronger (which is likely), what will that
mean? Early in his tenure some commenta-
tors predicted that he would spend the ﬁrst
ﬁve years building up his power, and then
use it to carry out wide-ranging economic
reforms as well as, perhaps, some limited
political ones. That now seems unlikely.
Mr Xi’s concentration of power has devel-
oped its own momentum and intensifying
control over a fast-evolving society ap-
pears to be his main aim. As one party oﬃ-
cial puts it, Mr Xi will remain a “stabilising
factor”; policy will not change much. 
It is not clear what will happen when
he steps down. Chinese leaders have tend-
ed to line up successors by this stage of
their tenure. Not Mr Xi. He recently ousted
the party chief of the south-western region
of Chongqing, once tipped as a possible
heir. The lack of an anointed successor
need not mean Mr Xi will stay for a third
term. But it does make it more likely that,
even if he steps down as general secretary
in 2022, he may try to hold the strings of
any new leader. After all, Deng retained
power from his perch as head of the China
Bridge Association. Since the pro-democ-
racy upheaval of 1989, the party has owed
its longevity partly to managing peaceful,
institutionalised transitions of power from
one autocratic leader to another. Mr Xi
may prove the joker in the pack. 7

26 China

Shopping

A turn-up for the books

G U A N G Z H O U A N D S H A N G H A I

Never mind the censors, some bookshops are cool
IN AN underground railway station be-
low the main public library in Shanghai
is a spacious bookshop called Jifeng. It is
one of the city’s most respected, but its
days are numbered. A display inside the
entrance (pictured, top) shows how many
of them remain before the shop closes—147
as of September 6th. The authorities, it
seems, have had enough of its open-mind-
ed selection of works and the talks it hosts
on controversial topics. 
The shop’s landlord is the library,
which has told the owners that it has “no
choice” but to terminate the rental contract
when it expires. Customers are mourning.
“I refuse to believe the dream is over…the
spirit of freedom will always exist,” wrote
one on the bookshop’s noticeboard. The
owners, however, have made it clear that
the shop is unlikely to get permission to
reopen elsewhere in Shanghai for the fore-
seeable future. 
During two decades of operation, Jifeng
has tested the patience of Shanghai’s cul-
turally conservative authorities. One of its
founders was a prominent liberal academ-
ic in the heady days before the crushing of
the Tiananmen Square protests in 1989.
The shop’s selection of books on politics
and philosophy reﬂects his tastes. Ever
tighter controls on debate under President
Xi Jinping may have added to pressure on
oﬃcials in Shanghai to take action.
Yet around China, privately owned
bookstores continue to defy both competi-
tion from online booksellers and heavy-
handed censorship (recently curbs are re-
ported to have been imposed on the num-
ber of foreign children’s books allowed to
be published). They are cashing in on de-
mand for something spicier than the dour
oﬀerings of state-run counterparts.
Take Fang Suo Commune, a chain
which opened its ﬁrst store six years ago in
Guangzhou. At the time, it appeared to
have little chance of success. The southern
city is often scorned in China as a “cultural
desert”, its residents stereotyped as having
little interest in highbrow pursuits. How
could such an establishment, located in an
upscale shopping mall, survive? 
But Commune has become an aspira-
tional brand like Dior and Dolce & Gab-
bana—European fashion houses that have
outlets in the same shopping centre in
Guangzhou. By some estimates, almost a
third of visitors to the complex enter Com-
mune’s doorway carved from a massive
single piece of ancient wood, and step into

The end is nigh

its subtly lit interior. 
On entering, customers encounter a
display of volumes of poetry, including
Chinese translations of Seamus Heaney,
an Irish Nobel laureate, and of Philip Lar-
kin, one of Britain’s best-loved 20th-cen-
tury bards. “Even though the market for
poetry is very small, we put this right at the
front of the store—we want people to real-
ise this is the root of literature,” says Cheng
Chen, a spokesperson. Farther inside are
Chinese versions of books by Susan Son-
tag, an American feminist, and of Robert
Pirsig’s classic novel about self-discovery,
“Zen and the Art of Motorcyle Mainte-
nance”. As in many Western bookshops,
staﬀ are chosen for their expertise in topics
related to the works on sale: something
rarely found among employees of state-
owned shops. 
Commune sells clothes, too. One cor-
ner of the shop is devoted to the Exception
de Mixmind fashion brand, which was
founded by the store’s owner, Mao Jihong,
and has made coats for China’s ﬁrst lady,
Peng Liyuan. These account for 20-30% of
Commune’s sales, says Ms Cheng. But
books are its main business. 
The model is catching on. Similar
stores, featuring cafés and sections selling
products such as teapots and fabric bags,
have been opening around the country. In
2015 Eslite, a Taiwanese chain—which pio-
neered 24-hour service in Taiwan’s capital,
Taipei—entered the market in China with a
branch in the city of Suzhou, west of
Shanghai. Another one planned for Shang-

The Economist September 9th 2017

hai itself has not materialised, possibly for
political reasons. Eslite’s shops in Taiwan
regularly sell items that would be consid-
ered sensitive in China, such as a docu-
mentary on DVD about Ai Weiwei, a dissi-
dent Chinese artist.
But even in Shanghai, despite Jifeng’s
travails, several new, elegantly designed
bookshops have opened in the past two
years. They include Long Time No Read. It
displays titles such as “Gay Life Stories”
and “On Democracy’s Doorstep”, a per-
mitted book about the history of universal
suﬀrage in America. Commune, having
opened branches in the south-western cit-
ies of Chongqing and Chengdu as well as
in Qingdao on the coast, is planning to
open another one, covering 8,000 square
metres, in a mall in Shanghai next year. 
That, too, may test local oﬃcials’ toler-
ance. Like Jifeng, Commune tries to attract
customers by organising talks—though not
always as edgy as Jifeng’s. Speakers over
the past year have included the Chinese
translator of Umberto Eco’s novel, “Num-
ero Zero”, which satirises politicians and
the media; and a ﬁlm director, Jia Zhangke,
whose movies about the social costs of
China’s boom sometimes rile the censors. 
But companies like Commune are care-
ful not to provoke the authorities too bla-
tantly. They obtain books published
abroad from a state-owned distributor, the
China National Publications Import and
Export Corporation (its motto: “Opening,
Harmonising, Innovating, Advancing”),
which prohibits anything critical of the
Communist Party. “There’s nothing we
can do about it,” Ms Cheng says.
In Shanghai, in a quiet side-street close
to Jifeng, is a café called 1984 that looks
much like a trendy bookshop (pictured,
bottom). Its entrance hall is lined with dif-
ferent editions of George Orwell’s dysto-
pian novel. But its owners are canny.
“None of the books in this shop is for sale,”
says a sign inside. 7

Orwell-themed Orwellianism

United States

The Economist September 9th 2017 27

Also in this section
28 How not to repatr iate proﬁts
29 The cost of thinking
29 Amer ica’s most proliﬁc judge
30 Alaskan detr itus
31 Free speech on campus
32 Lexington: Farewell

Immigration politics

A dream deferred

C H I C A G O , L O S A N G E L E S A N D W A S H I N G T O N , D C

Donald Trump ends a controversial Obama-era programme, leaving the fate of
undocumented immigrants with Congress
WHEN Karla Robles was 16 years old,
she tried to register for college-en-
trance exams, like hundreds of thousands
of high-school juniors in Chicago. She
found that she could not—she lacked a so-
cial-security number. That was how Ms
Robles learned she was in the United
States illegally. Her parents brought her
and her two brothers from Mexico when
she was eight years old. Her father deliv-
ered pizzas, pumped petrol and drove
trucks; her mother cleaned houses. Like
many of America’s other 11m or so undocu-
mented immigrants, Ms Robles and her
brothers may have been heading for simi-
lar lives in the grey economy. 
In June 2012, however, Barack Obama
created the Deferred Action for Childhood
Arrivals (DACA) programme. DACA gives
two-year work and residency permits to
undocumented immigrants younger than
31, without criminal records, who were
brought to America before they were 16,
provided they are in or have graduated
from high school or university or were
honourably discharged from the armed
forces. DACA is not automatic; recipients
must apply, pay $495 for each two-year re-
newable permit and provide a great deal of
personal information. In ﬁve years the pro-
gramme has brought nearly 800,000
young people—Americans in all but legal
status—out of the shadows and let them
live productive lives. Now those shadows

beckon again. On September 5th President
Donald Trump’s
administration an-
nounced the end of DACA, though he
promised no action would be taken
against current recipients for six months, to
give Congress the chance to act. 
To Mr Trump’s supporters, this decision
is overdue; cracking down on illegal immi-
grants deﬁned his campaign, and as a can-
didate he vowed to end DACA on his ﬁrst
day in oﬃce. Once in oﬃce, however, he
softened. “DACA is a very, very diﬃcult
subject for me,” he said in February. In an
interview with the Associated Press he
told DACA recipients that they should “rest
easy”, because his administration is “after
the criminals, not them.”
The mixed messaging continues. Mr
Trump said he had “great heart for these
folks”, and called his decision a “gradual
process, not a sudden phase-out”, but
White House talking points urged DACA
recipients to “prepare for and arrange their
departure from the United States”. Mr
Trump said that DACA was “an end-run
around Congress” that “violat[es] the core
tenets that sustain our Republic.” But then
he changed tack, tweeting that if Congress
fails to act, “I will revisit this issue!”
To announce DACA’s end, Mr Trump
dispatched Jeﬀ Sessions, his attorney-gen-
eral, a longtime immigration sceptic, who
said that DACA “denied jobs to hundreds
of thousands of Americans by allowing

For daily analysis and debate on Amer ica, visit
Economist.com/unitedstates
Economist.com/blogs/democracyinamer ica

those same jobs to go to illegal aliens”—a
claim for which no evidence exists. The av-
erage DACA recipient came to America at
the age of six, and today is 25 years old. Ac-
cording to a survey conducted by Tom
Wong of the University of California, San
Diego, most recipients say that DACA
helped them get better-paying jobs and be-
come more ﬁnancially independent. Over
93% of DACA recipients above the age of 25
are employed (compared with 78% of all
Americans between the ages of 25 and 54).
They have strong ties to America; most
have a spouse, child or sibling who is an
American citizen. The Migration Policy In-
stitute, a think-tank, found that they are
likelier than their ineligible coevals to be in
white-collar jobs, rather than the informal
manual labour often performed by undoc-
umented workers.

Terriﬁc people
Mr Wong’s survey found that, freed from
the fear of deportation, many DACA recipi-
ents are starting businesses, buying homes
and cars and opening bank accounts. Mr
Trump’s administration might have quiet-
ly continued DACA had ten state attorneys-
general, led by Ken Paxton of Texas, not
threatened to take the White House to
court if it did not undo DACA by Septem-
ber 5th. That forced Mr Trump either to end
the programme, or have Mr Sessions de-
fend it in court.
Unsurprisingly, he chose to end it. Re-
publicans have long had DACA in their
cross-hairs. Mr Obama’s administration
had called it a mere “exercise of prosecuto-
rial discretion”, but Republicans never ac-
cepted that description. It became an arti-
cle of faith on the right that DACA was, as
Mr Sessions described it, “an unconstitu-
tional exercise of authority by the execu-
tive branch”—though no court has found it 

1

28 United States

2 so. But Mr Paxton and his nine would-be
co-plaintiﬀs chose their judge carefully.
They brought suit before Andrew Hanen, a
federal district judge who in 2015 blocked a
broader companion programme to DACA
aimed at undocumented-immigrant par-
ents of American citizens (though not on
constitutional grounds). Ending DACA also
allowed Mr Trump to further his attacks on
his predecessor’s legacy, which seems to be
an animating impulse of his presidency.
Now the work moves to Congress. De-
monstrations broke out across the country
when the administration announced its
decision. Angel Padilla of Indivisible, a left-
wing activist group that successfully mo-
bilised against the repeal of the Aﬀordable
Care Act, says, “we are ramping up our ef-
forts…This White House has a vision of
what America should look like, and brown
people aren’t included in that vision.” Mr
Obama broke his customary post-presi-
dential quietude to call Mr Trump’s deci-
sion “self-defeating” and “cruel”.
Similar sentiments have been ex-
pressed in the business world. Tim Cook,
Apple’s boss, said he was “dismayed” at
Mr Trump’s decision, having previously
tweeted that 250 Apple employees are
DACA recipients, and “I stand with them.”
More than 400 business leaders—includ-
ing the bosses of Amazon, AT&T and Wells
Fargo—posted an open letter urging Mr
Trump not to scrap DACA. Loren Kruger,
boss of a ﬁrm that makes shipping-pallets
in Texas, says she signed because DACA re-
cipients “are our neighbours, colleagues
and friends. To send them to a country and
culture they don’t know: that’s inhumane
and unacceptable.”
It is another question whether Con-
gress can overcome its dysfunction and act
on such sentiments—and those of the vast
majority of Americans, who also oppose
deporting DACA-eligible immigrants. Leg-
islative proposals exist. Lindsey Graham
and Richard Durbin, a Republican and a
Democratic senator, have once again rein-
troduced the DREAM Act—a piece of legis-
lation that would do what DACA does and
has been ﬂoating around Congress, close
to but never quite passing, for more than 15
years. In the House Mike Coﬀman, a Re-
publican from Colorado, plans to intro-
duce a discharge petition to force his
BRIDGE Act—which freezes DACA in place
for three years—to the House ﬂoor, bypass-
ing the lengthy committee process. Carlos
Curbelo, a Republican congressman from
Florida, has introduced the RAC (Recognis-
ing America’s Children) Act, which does
much the same thing as DACA but also in-
cludes a path to citizenship; Thom Tillis, a
Republican from North Carolina, will in-
troduce it in the senate. Our YouGov poll
shows that only half of those who say they
voted for Mr Trump in 2016 oppose DACA.
But the popularity of any of these mea-
sures on their own is academic. Republi-

cans will almost certainly demand en-
forcement measures. Some, Democrats
could probably live with; others—notably
the border wall, over which Mr Trump
threatened to shut down government—
they could not. The Republican leadership
dislikes bringing measures to the ﬂoor that
need Democratic votes to pass, which vir-
tually any immigration bill will. The small
but powerful coterie of hardliners in both
houses have Breitbart at their backs, ready
to rile up Mr Trump’s base against any-
thing that smacks of “globalism”. The six-
month delay means Congress may only
get to immigration in March, right as mod-
erate House Republicans start worrying
about primary challenges from the right.
“The uncertainty is nerve-racking,” says
Karla Robles, now at university studying to
become a teacher. It will not end soon. 7

Tax reform

Holiday nightmare

W A S H I N G T O N , D C

Cutting taxes on proﬁts already earned
abroad would be a pointless giveaway
THE White House has long promised to
fund tax cuts by scrapping unspeciﬁed
loopholes and deductions. As Congress
ﬁlls in the blanks, there is one source of rev-
enue that looks all but certain to be tapped:
the staggering pile of cash America’s ﬁrms
keep in foreign subsidiaries, which totalled
$2.6trn in 2015, according to an estimate by
the Joint Committee on Taxation. (The
president says the ﬁgure is $3trn-5trn to-
day.) Unfortunately, this would probably
result in a windfall for shareholders, with
few gains for anyone else.
Firms keep proﬁts oﬀshore primarily to
avoid paying corporate tax, which is levied
only when money is repatriated (monies

The Economist September 9th 2017

paid to foreign governments are knocked
oﬀ the bill). As untaxed proﬁts have piled
up, politicians from both parties have eyed
them greedily. Hillary Clinton once hoped
to start an infrastructure bank with money
raised from ﬁrms’ foreign cash.
Getting ﬁrms to bring more money
home has been tried before. In 2004 Con-
gress enacted a tax holiday to that end.
Firms were charged a bargain rate of 5.25%,
instead of the usual 35%, on repatriated
proﬁts. The law’s advocates said it would
spark an investment boom, despite warn-
ings from President George W. Bush’s eco-
nomic advisers that none would material-
ise. The wonks were right. According to the
best available study, repatriations did not
increase domestic investment or employ-
ment. Instead, each of the $312bn brought
back to America was associated with a
payout to shareholders of 60-92 cents. Reg-
ulations designed to stop such payouts
were ineﬀective.
Circumstances are diﬀerent this time.
Republicans want more than a temporary
holiday; they promise a switch to a “terri-
torial” tax system, like those found in the
rest of the rich world. That means taxing
only proﬁts earned at home, removing the
incentive to stash away foreign earnings in
the ﬁrst place. Still, making the switch
means deciding what to do with the cash
accumulated overseas under the old sys-
tem. The eﬀect of bringing it home would
probably be the same as in 2004. Yet the
president says that repatriations would
“spur billions of dollars in new invest-
ments in our struggling communities”. 
There are three reasons for scepticism.
First, ﬁrms are not short of cash to invest. In
the S&P 500, the ten ﬁrms with the biggest
foreign bank balances, totalling $683bn, al-
ready have $153bn to hand onshore. It is un-
likely that ﬁlling domestic coﬀers further
would encourage more investment, given
that the same ﬁrms returned $138bn to
shareholders in dividends and buy-backs
over the past year. Repatriation alone
would not suddenly make investments
more attractive than such payouts.
Second, almost half of the cash ﬁrms
hold in foreign subsidiaries is already de-
nominated in dollars, according to a sur-
vey from 2011. These funds are probably sit-
ting in American bank accounts. (Such
deposits do not count as repatriations for
tax purposes.) They already support bank
loans, and hence investment, in America.
Finally, to the extent that ﬁrms do buy
dollars to bring proﬁts home, they will
push up the value of the greenback. A
stronger dollar would be bad for the manu-
facturers who are close to Mr Trump’s
heart. It would also tend to increase the
trade deﬁcit, which he deplores.
In any event, the low tax rates Republi-
cans and some Democrats want to levy on
repatriated cash make little sense. In 2016
Republicans in the House of Representa-

1

The Economist September 9th 2017 

2 tives proposed a rate of just 8.75%; Mr
Trump’s plans have suggested a 10% levy. If
ﬁrms are forced to repatriate cash, there is
an argument for a discount from 35%, says
Alan Viard of the American Enterprise In-
stitute, a think-tank, because ﬁrms would
lose the beneﬁt of putting oﬀ the bill indeﬁ-
nitely. But go too low and the government
would just be giving shareholders an unex-
pected payday.
A higher charge would help pay for tax
cuts on future earnings—a policy which
could spark new investment. It would also
avoid rewarding tax-avoidance strategies.
A recent study by scholars at Stanford Uni-
versity and the University of Chicago
found that ﬁrms began stashing signiﬁcant
amounts of cash overseas at the same time
as Congress started debating a second re-
patriation tax holiday in 2011. 7

Think-tanks

It’s conﬂicated

W A S H I N G T O N , D C

The New America Foundation’s goat
rodeo illustrates a recurring problem
BARRY LYNN does not waste time. Two
days after being sacked from the New
America Foundation, a think-tank where
he had worked for 15 years, he stands calm-
ly directing staﬀers in an immaculate grey
suit in an oﬃce just around the corner from
his old gig. The trouble began for Mr Lynn
and his Open Markets team, a research out-
ﬁt that advocated anti-monopoly regula-
tions, after he published a statement prais-
ing the European Commission for levying
a $2.7bn ﬁne on Google—a big donor to the
think-tank. Eric Schmidt, chairman of Goo-
gle’s parent company, was upset. Susan
Molinari, Google’s chief lobbyist, spoke to
Anne-Marie Slaughter, New America’s
president and chief executive.
What transpired next is disputed. A few
hours after he published the oﬀending
statement, says Mr Lynn, he received a call
from Ms Slaughter. In his telling, she said
that Mr Schmidt and Google, which had
donated more than $21m to the founda-
tion, wanted to cut oﬀ all ties—and that Mr
Schmidt wanted his name scrubbed from
the think-tank’s website, and his name re-
moved from its conference room, the “Eric
Schmidt Ideas Lab”. Two days later, Mr
Lynn was told that New America and
Open Markets would be parting ways, and
was given two months to leave. Ms Slaugh-
ter said she would not discuss private con-
versations with either Mr Lynn or Mr
Schmidt, but said Google never threatened
to pull funding. Google said the same.
What is certain is that the ﬁght ended
with Mr Lynn’s team leaving New America

and a black eye for Ms Slaughter, who ap-
pears to have folded under pressure and
ﬁred a well-respected scholar. The scandal
has morphed into an existential crisis for
New America, a newcomer in the think-
tank world that has nonetheless estab-
lished itself as a heavyweight. But it is only
the latest victim of a common ailment
among think-tanks—overly cosy relation-
ships with donors that, when revealed,
damage institutional credibility.
A month ago, leaked e-mails showed
that the UAE had arranged a secret $20m
donation to the Middle East Institute, a re-
spected think-tank, to counter “egregious
misperceptions about the region”. Last
year, an investigation by the New York
Times found that the Brookings Institution,
perhaps America’s most prestigious think-
tank, had accepted large donations from
Lennar Corporation, a home-building
ﬁrm, and promoted the company’s pro-
jects. The Centre for American Progress, a
left-leaning think-tank, kept a secret roster
of corporate donors and advocated for
some of their interests.
Much think-tank wonkery is treated as
authoritative by journalists and regula-
tors—the reaped rewards from decades of
rigorous work. Companies and foreign
governments recognise the advantages
this brings over conventional lobbying,
which few would mistake as independent
and 
impartial. Laundering
lobbying
through a think-tank, which oﬀers tax ad-
vantages and less onerous disclosure re-
quirements, can seem attractive.
Some think-tanks host sister lobbying
organisations, which present their own
risks. Witness the sad decline of the Heri-
tage Foundation, once a conservative
thought juggernaut and now hard to dis-
tinguish from a campaign group. Other
thinkers juggle jobs, collecting cash from
industries they write about. The Peterson
Institute, a prominent economic-policy
think-tank, ﬁred three researchers for such
conﬂicts of interest. With enough such sto-
ries, the entire enterprise starts to seem sus-
pect—no good thing when dispassionate
analysis is already dismissed as elitist.
Such tensions may reﬂect a fundamen-
tal ﬂaw. Unlike other institutions designed
to promote free inquiry, such as universi-
ties or some publications, think-tanks do
not enjoy large endowments, researcher
tenure or subscription revenue to insulate
thinkers from paymasters. And thinking
costs a lot. In its latest tax ﬁling, Brookings
reported spending more than $100m in a
year. Some big patrons might clumsily seek
to inﬂuence research directly, and must be
politely rebuﬀed by think-tank bosses.
Some take a more subtle approach. “When
the king expresses displeasure, everyone
knows how to interpret it,” says Zephyr
Teachout, a law professor and fellow at the
Open Markets programme.
This is the mess in which Ms Slaughter,

United States 29

Slaughter in hot water

a respected scholar in her own right, ﬁnds
herself. Despite her insistence that the
sacking had nothing to do with Mr Lynn’s
work but was instead forced by his lack of
collegiality, the weight of the evidence ap-
pears to be on Mr Lynn’s side. E-mails she
said had been taken out of context did not,
when made public, oﬀer much exculpa-
tory evidence. After initially casting the
story about Mr Lynn’s ﬁring as “false”, she
has said she regretted that choice of words.
To assuage her critics, who say that she has
now tainted the work of all of New Ameri-
ca’s scholars, the ultimate penalty may be
more than contrition. 7

Richard Posner

Gavel down

N EW Y O R K

America’s most proliﬁc judge retires
after 35 years on the Seventh Circuit
IN a profession marked by pomp and pre-
tence, Richard Posner, who is retiring
from the judiciary, is a renegade. For Dick,
as he is known to his staﬀ, the tradition of
clerks addressing their bosses as “judge”
exempliﬁes the judiciary’s stodginess and
resistance to innovation. In his decades as
a writer and a jurist, Mr Posner, aged 78,
“changed the legal landscape”, says Eric Se-
gall, his collaborator and a law professor at
Georgia State University. Laurence Tribe of
Harvard Law School says Mr Posner has
had a “uniquely broad inﬂuence” on the le-
gal academy and on America’s courts.
Few of the nearly 200 circuit-court
judges who handle appeals from Ameri-
ca’s 94 district courts make headlines. Mr
Posner grabs many. The judge’s “staggering
work ethic” and “ﬁerce intellect” start to ex-
plain his renown, Mr Segall says. Mr

1

30 United States

The Economist September 9th 2017

2

Posner is the most-cited legal scholar of all
time, according to a 2000 study. He has
written more than 3,000 judicial opinions,
hundreds of articles and dozens of books,
including “The Federal Judiciary: Strengths
and Weaknesses”, a scathing 2017 portrait
in which readers are hard-pressed to dis-
cover many “strengths”. 
Mr Posner thinks most judges are lousy
writers who rely unduly on their clerks
and are “stuck in the past”, paying obei-
sance to fusty traditions. He does not spare
the Supreme Court. “I don’t think the jus-
tices are doing a good job,” he writes, and
“obviously” are not the nine best-qualiﬁed
lawyers in America. (Are they “nine of the
best 10,000? I’ll give them that.”) None
measures up to the likes of Oliver Wendell
Holmes or Louis Brandeis, he writes, “with
the possible exception” of Stephen Breyer
and Ruth Bader Ginsburg, two liberal jus-
tices on the Supreme Court. Mr Posner re-
serves particular ire for the late Antonin
Scalia, a “hyperconservative” justice he
lambasted for his originalist jurisprudence
and for neglecting his health.
The cardinal sin of most judges and jus-
tices, Mr Posner argues, is their disingenu-
ous allegiance to a formal conception of
law. Whether a judge aims to apply the law
as it was understood at the time it was en-
acted (Scalia’s originalism) or in light of its
underlying moral principles (as the late
Ronald Dworkin, the second-most-cited le-
gal scholar of the 20th century, did), the
quest is quixotic. “I’m a pragmatist,” Mr
Posner writes. His approach to a case is
“not to worry initially about doctrine, pre-
cedent and the other conventional materi-
als of legal analysis”. Instead, he tries to
“ﬁgure out the sensible solution to the pro-
blem” and only then ask whether it is
“blocked by an authoritative precedent of
the Supreme Court or by some other case
that judges must obey”.
Before he took his seat on the Seventh
Circuit, Mr Posner spent six years working
in government and 12 as a law professor at
Stanford and the University of Chicago. In
1973 his “Economic Analysis of Law” be-
came a foundational text of the widely in-
ﬂuential “law and economics” movement.
According to this approach, law is best un-
derstood as a mechanism for promoting
economic eﬃciency writ large. Compensa-
tion is not the heart of tort law, for example:
encouraging people to guard against acci-
dents is. Racial discrimination is worth
banning not because people have inviola-
ble rights but because bias exacts a toll in
the form of warped relationships. “Law
and economics” has been employed to
make sense of concepts as disparate as the
right to privacy, contracts and, as Mr Posner
wrote in 1981, “the meaning of justice”. 
A reverence for markets is at the core of
law and economics, and Mr Posner was
conservative enough to earn an appoint-
ment from Ronald Reagan. But later in his

Alaskan detr itus

A load of rubbish

H O M E R

Heaps of trash in remote villages are set to grow
MANAGING rubbish in Alaska’s bush
villages—small communities acces-
sible only by boat or aircraft and often
hundreds of miles from the nearest high-
way—is hard. Waste—including freezers,
computers and vehicles—piles up with
no easy way to remove it. Rural landﬁlls,
which are mostly open, unlined and
unmanaged, spill across tundra and into
nearby rivers, and hazardous materials
leach into soil and water. Smoke from
burning trash blows into villages, some-
times closing schools. From 2020, fund-
ing from the Environmental Protection
Agency that has been essential for deal-
ing with rubbish in these remote places
will disappear.
Jan Olson is the City Administrator in
Hooper Bay, a village of about 1,200
people at the edge of the Bering Sea,
where children learn Yupik in school. Mr
Olson describes his home as a “hunter’s
dream, a gatherer’s dream”. Open tundra
stretches for miles. A short distance from
the village, residents can ﬁll their larders
with moose, seals, whale, walrus, geese,
ducks, ﬁsh, clams and berries.
Mr Olson, whose oﬃce is less than 150
yards from the landﬁll, estimates that
residents junk ﬁve to ten refrigerators
each year and the same number of four-
wheelers. Computers and other electron-
ic waste as well as hazardous materials,
such as car batteries and used motor oil,
accumulate too. Complicating matters is
the fact that more than half of village
households—about 6,000 homes across
the state—do not have indoor plumbing
and instead rely on “honey buckets”,
ﬁve-gallon buckets lined with a plastic
bag and with a loo seat perched on top.
Residents dump their buckets by foot or
all-terrain vehicle in the landﬁll. The
stench wafts into the nearby cemetery
during funerals.

Meet the new garbage man

Research has linked birth defects,
premature births and low birth
weights—as well as temporary faintness,
headaches, and nausea—to the open
dumps. Leaching threatens drinking
water. Most rural communities burn
rubbish regularly. The smoke can contain
dioxins, benzene and PCBs. Mr Olson
attributes a recent outbreak of skin sores
on local children to the fumes from a ﬁre
illicitly set at the dump.
Federal funds have been essential in
helping people manage solid waste,
shipping out hazardous materials for
proper treatment, hiring landﬁll oper-
ators and educating local residents. In
Hooper Bay, a village where 40% of the
residents live below the federal poverty
level, the expiration of these EPA grants
will leave a big gap. “It’s already impos-
sible to keep up with the junk,” Mr Olson
said. “It’s going to get harder.”

tenure, his ideological tilt shifted. “I’ve be-
come less conservative”, he said in 2012,
“since the Republican Party started becom-
ing goofy.” Mr Posner invalidated bans on
gay marriage and inveighed against a vot-
er-ID law in 2014. The following year, he
struck down a restrictive abortion law in
Wisconsin because it was based on “spuri-
ous
contentions
regarding women’s
health”. A few months ago, he joined a rul-
ing conﬁrming that sex-discrimination
laws protected a lesbian professor who
says she was pushed out of her job.
Idiosyncrasies attract varied critics. Mi-
chael Dorf, a leftish professor at Cornell, la-

ments Mr Posner’s “peevish” turn in recent
years. Ed Whelan, a rightish commentator,
calls “The Federal Judiciary” the “worst-
edited book that I have ever tried to wade
through” and faults the author for endors-
ing some infamously bad rulings as right
for their time. Mr Posner’s pragmatic im-
pulse produced some scattershot results:
he has changed his tune on several issues
over the years, including same-sex mar-
riage and voter-ID rules. That shows the
limits of a method tied to even a brilliant
judge’s sense of what works. In the hands
of a lesser judge, his approach might bring
dodgier results. 7

United States 31

the lead. The dean of faculty, Nigel Nichol-
son, later wrote that students came to the
session “asking questions designed to in-
dict the speaker…It felt like a courtroom,
not a college.”
Earlier in the year, demonstrators pre-
sented the administration with a sensible
demand, to make more eﬀort to attract and
retain black students, and a lot of eccentric
ones, including a beefed-up role for stu-
dents in judging grievances against faculty,
and collegewide racial sensitivity training.
They also demanded a paid annual staﬀ
holiday honouring the day of their initial
demonstration.

Thermidorian reaction
Many students have said privately that the
campus has become a place where they
are afraid to express dissenting opinions.
Students who disagree with the protesters’
views, on social media, have been de-
nounced as racists by activist leaders. A
newly accepted international student was
mocked when she asked her future class-
mates if there were any libertarian groups
on campus. White students have com-
plained that they have been told by other
students that they are unjustiﬁed in speak-
ing about race and identity in class. When
one student voiced a dissenting opinion
on social media, his classmate threatened
to get him ﬁred from his job at the college
bookstore. “It’s an environment with limit-
ed representation of opinion, and it can be
hostile to students who hold other views,”
says Yuta Kato, a sophomore.
Yet at Reed College this term there are
also signs of a counter-revolution. A pro-
fessor of Muslim studies refused to lecture
in front of protesters and taught his class of
150 students outside, under a tree. Some
freshmen have shouted down protesters.
One (black) student told them: “This is a
classroom. This is not the place. Right now
we are trying to learn. We are freshmen
students.” The rest of his speech was
drowned out by applause. 7

The Economist September 9th 2017 

Campus life

Blue on blue

P O R T L A N D , O R E G O N

of them berated her, bringing her to tears.
Demonstrators said Ms Valdivia was
guilty of a variety of oﬀences: she was a
“race traitor” who upheld white suprema-
cist principles by failing to oppose the Hu-
manities syllabus. She was “anti-black” be-
cause she appropriated black slang by
wearing a T-shirt that said, “Poetry is Lit”.
She was an “ableist” because she believes
trigger warnings sometimes diminish sex-
ual trauma. She was also called a “gas-
lighter” for making disadvantaged stu-
dents doubt
their own feelings of
oppression. “I am intimidated by these stu-
dents,” she later wrote in a blog post. “I am
scared to teach courses on race, gender or
sexuality or even texts that bring these is-
sues up in any way…I’m at a loss as to how
to begin to address it, especially since
many of these students don’t believe in
historicity or objective facts (they de-
nounce the latter as being a tool of the
white cisheteropatriarchy).”
A few weeks later, the college invited
Kimberly Peirce, the gender-ﬂuid director
of “Boys Don’t Cry”, which was widely
praised as the ﬁrst sympathetic portrayal
of trans people in cinema. Protesters
ripped down posters promoting the event
and put up their own posters that said:
“Fuck this cis white bitch” (“cis” being
shorthand for cisgendered, or people who
identify with their birth sex) and “Fuck
your transphobia.” When Ms Peirce tried
to speak, they shouted her down because
they felt she had proﬁted from violence
against trans people and because she had
cast Hillary Swank, a non-trans actor, as

Arguments over free speech on campus are often seen as an issue of left v right. But
the left v left battles can be just as vitriolic
FRESHMEN crowded the lecture hall at
9am for Humanities 110, the ﬁrst class of
their college careers. Elizabeth Drumm, the
head of the programme, made some intro-
ductory remarks, her voice quavering. As
some faculty members moved to take their
places at a panel discussion, three demon-
strators emerged from the wings of the au-
ditorium. “We’re protesting Hum 110 be-
cause it’s Eurocentric,” one began. “I’m
sorry, this is a classroom space and this is
not appropriate,” Ms Drumm said, imme-
diately cancelling the lecture. Thus began
another academic year at Reed College, a
liberal arts college in Portland, Oregon. 
Last academic year, a dozen or so stu-
dents continuously occupied the three-
day-a-week lecture series by sitting in front
of the auditorium with cardboard signs,
sometimes taping their mouths in protest
at the absence of non-white voices in the
syllabus. One even took to lecturing the
freshman class on the podium from an al-
ternate curriculum before the start of each
session. But this year, the college’s presi-
dent sent out an e-mail outlining the
school’s dissent policy 16 minutes before
the lecture began, warning that the admin-
istration would act against potential viola-
tions. Reed College students were ranked
as the most liberal and the second most
studious in Princeton Review’s survey of its
top 382 liberal arts colleges. That com-
pound of leftist politics and serious schol-
arship proved unstable last year as activ-
ists managed 
to cow the college’s
administration, students and faculty alike.
The protesters argue that the Human-
ities programme is racist because it ignores
many of the world’s great civilisations and
because its authors are overwhelmingly
male and white. They point out that black
students represent less than 3% of the
school’s 1,400 students and argue that the
administration has not done enough to
support them. A good portion of the stu-
dent body appear to support their goals
and tactics. 
Assistant professor Lucia Martinez Val-
divia, who describes herself as mixed-race
and queer, asked protesters not to demon-
strate during her lecture on Sappho last No-
vember. Ms Valdivia said she suﬀered from
post-traumatic
stress
disorder
and
doubted her ability to deliver the lecture in
the face of their opposition. At ﬁrst, demon-
strators announced they would change
tactics and sit quietly in the audience,
wearing black. After her speech, a number

The cisheteropatr iarchy at rest

32 United States

The Economist September 9th 2017

Lexington

Indispensable, in trouble

Our Lexington columnist bids an anxious farewell

technical talk about water rights and grazing permits. But deep
down this was a scrap about whether ranchers and miners
whose great-grandfathers toiled to tame the sagebrush steppes
are trustworthy stewards of the land. That row pits the old West
against the new West of hikers and environmentalists, or, as one
academic puts it, folk with gun racks against those with bike
racks. The ranchers, meanwhile, challenged the standing of the
cowboy-hatted anti-government zealots claiming to speak for
Oregon. A young farmer noted that most came from out of state,
adding: “Those people look like us, but aren’t us.”
Partisans on the left sometimes scoﬀ at conservatives ascrib-
ing voter anger to “economic anxiety”, arguing that this is really
prejudice at work. In real life, diﬀering forms of anxiety cannot
easily be separated. In 2012 the state of Wisconsin commissioned
a scientiﬁc report into why middle-aged men were buying fewer
licences to hunt deer. That sounds a dry premise. But tugging at
that thread unravelled a vast, tangled skein of male angst. With
women gaining economic and social power, the study found,
men feel less able to head to the woods for a week’s deer camp,
supremely conﬁdent in their authority as breadwinners. To be
good fathers, they feel less able to skip children’s sports. “The la-
dies all hollered at me,” one research subject recalled after a deer-
related conﬂict, in tones of baﬄed hurt.
Mr Trump did not invent partisan divisions. The 2012 presi-
dential elections, a joyless slog, saw President Barack Obama tra-
duce the Republican candidate, Mitt Romney as a heartless pluto-
crat and thus “not one of us”. Republicans leant heavily on
slogans that lauded hard-working, taxpaying “makers” and
scorning welfare-collecting “takers”. Millions of voters were will-
ing to believe that Democrats won oﬃce by giving free stuﬀ to the
lazy on their dime. But they also growled that Republicans were
the party that looked out for bosses, not them. A machine repair-
man from Waukesha, Wisconsin, encountered during a factory
visit by Mr Obama after his re-election, summarised, brilliantly,
his moral code of work. “People ought to get oﬀ their duﬀs and get
a job, but I’d like it to be a job that pays well,” he explained. He
trusted neither party to deliver this package in its entirety.

Deadbeats v deplorables
A focus group of Trump supporters in December 2015 oﬀered ear-
ly clues that the businessman had found a way to escape voter
distrust of traditional politicians. His backers spent three hours
excusing their hero of each contradiction or untruth alleged by
his foes. In part, this reﬂected their liking for certain policies: the
proposed ban on Muslims, or the border wall. But an unforgetta-
ble moment came when the Trump fans were asked about Barack
Obama, and responded with furious, vitriolic resentment. Every-
thing we are good at in America, Mr Obama tells us it is a bad
thing, said a woman. Another disgustedly compared the then-
president to “a disappointed parent”. With Mr Trump, it was the
opposite. His supporters basked in his approval. He was a fantas-
tically successful man, who validated how they saw the world.
There are plausible scenarios in which Mr Trump, a cynical
and undisciplined bully, brings catastrophe to the country that
Lexington was raised to love, and where both his children were
born. For now consider a disaster that is already certain. Mr
Trump has a rare understanding of how change has left millions
feeling disrespected, abused and alienated from mainstream pol-
itics. Alas, he has used that gift only to divide his country, for self-
ish ends. This is a tragic waste. 7

AS LEXINGTON writes this, his 244th and ﬁnal column on
America, a black-and-white photograph looks down from an
oﬃce wall. Taken in New York in about 1940, it shows your colum-
nist’s late father, then a serious young man in his 20s, hard at
work for a British government agency tasked with bringing
America into the second world war. This mission involved both
appeals to high-minded principle and to sentiment—tales of Brit-
ish civilian pluck were a staple—to counter the rhetoric of the
America First Committee and other isolationists.
During two postings to Washington, DC, this Lexington has
tried to remember that history lesson. America remains an indis-
pensable nation. But understandably, the will to bear that burden
cannot be taken for granted. For Americans to remain open to the
world, at once leading and proﬁting from a post-war order that
their country in large part designed, both heads and hearts must
be won. With each new generation, that work needs repeating.
Enter President Donald Trump. A natural demagogue, he spot-
ted how, after years of the war on terror, America was weary of
trying to ﬁx an ungrateful world. He grasped how, at home, mil-
lions could conceive of no benign explanation for economic and
social changes that worried or disgusted them, and heard no ar-
gument from the two main parties that reassured them. He
sensed that voters are more than adding machines, weighing the
costs and beneﬁts of this stale tax plan or that tired promise of
help. He won in part by understanding how much people need to
feel that they are useful, respected and heeded. A better man than
Mr Trump could have done great things with that insight.
In years of reporting from a total of 46 states, a handful of en-
counters stand out. They showed how, when Americans think
they are arguing about points of ideology or fact (or confected
para-facts), they are often wrangling about who is a good person,
with a right to be heard. 
Take the wilds of eastern Oregon, where ranchers spent the
Obama era fearing that vast tracts of the Owyhee Canyonlands
would be declared a national monument, exposing them to law-
suits from eco-absolutists bent on banning cattle from public
lands. In early 2016 armed anti-government militants occupied a
wildlife refuge to challenge the federal government’s right to own
land at all. Visiting a few months later, Lexington heard much

The Amer icas

The Economist September 9th 2017 33

Also in this section
34 A br idge battle in Detroit-Windsor
34 Hurr icane Irma str ikes the Car ibbean
34 Disappearances in Argentina
36 Bello: Rebuilding the radical centre

Colombia’s peace process

Joining the party

B O G O T Á

The FARC guerrillas are set to enter electoral politics. Is Colombia ready for them?
ON SEPTEMBER 1st thousands of mem-
ﬁght to the ballot box. And if peace is to
bers and supporters of the FARC
last, the rest of Colombia will have to ac-
thronged the central square of Bogotá. At
cept it as a legitimate political force.
any other time in the past 50 years, such a
So far, the FARC’s most visible choice
sight might have meant that Colombia’s
has been its deﬁant name. The initials are
government had collapsed. But the group
synonymous with bombs and abductions.
was not there to celebrate a military vic-
Iván Márquez, a former guerrilla leader,
tory for the FARC (Revolutionary Armed
admits that the name is a liability. None-
Forces of Colombia), a feared guerrilla
theless, he says, “it also represents our his-
army. Instead, the fans were hailing the
tory.” The FARC maintains its leftist ideals,
launch of the FARC (Common Alternative
and insists it has not surrendered. And the
Revolutionary Force), a new political party.
way it made the decision reﬂects its em-
Just 20 years ago, Colombia was nearly
brace of democracy. Over 1,200 delegates
a failed state. From 1992-99, two-thirds of
to its founding convention voted on a new
the world’s kidnappings occurred there,
name, and “FARC” won with 628 votes.
and the FARC controlled up to a third of the
The FARC has also kept up its combative
country’s territory. But starting in 2002, the
spirit while funding restitution for its vic-
government of Álvaro Uribe unleashed
tims. Its list of assets included boots,
the army against the guerrillas, crippling
orange juicers, weapons it had already giv-
them militarily. His successor, Juan Manuel
en up and roads it had built. Rafael Pardo,
Santos, kept up the pressure but also invit-
the minister for post-conﬂict issues, called
ed the FARC to peace negotiations.
the declaration a mockery of the exercise.
After four years of talks, the two sides
struck a deal in 2016. The terms were con-
troversial. Most rank-and-ﬁle FARC ﬁghters
were granted amnesty, and their com-
manders were free to run for oﬃce. In a ref-
erendum on October 2nd voters narrowly
rejected the pact, forcing the parties to re-
draft it and adopt it in Congress.
Nonetheless, opponents of the accord—
led by Mr Uribe, who is now a senator—
could not halt its momentum. On August
15th the guerrillas handed over the last of
their weapons. The FARC will now take its

Walking the walk
At the same time, the ex-guerrillas have
proved willing to break with their past.
Their property disclosure also contained
land, cattle, 267,520 grams (8,600 ounces)
of gold and $450,000 in cash, for a total val-
ue of $328m. And both their video ads on
social media and the speeches at their con-
vention were devoid of Marxist claptrap.
Instead, they focused on issues such as
health care and job security.
At the convention, Rodrigo Londoño

(pictured, left), the FARC’s president, said it
would campaign “without dogmatism or
sectarianism, far from ideological ostenta-
tion”. Railing against corruption may be
the best strategy. A recent Gallup poll
found 87% disapproved of Colombia’s cur-
rent political parties, which have been dis-
credited by scandals and inﬁghting—high-
er than the 84% disapproving of the FARC.
The FARC’s transformation may prove
even harder for existing parties than it is for
the guerrillas. Looking at peace deals be-
tween 1975 and 2005, Aila Matanock of the
University of California, Berkeley, found
that conﬂicts reignited within ﬁve years in
56% of cases which did not include terms
for ex-rebels to take part in electoral poli-
tics, but only in 21% of those that did. That
suggests that turning the FARC into a nor-
mal party might help secure the peace. The
FARC will not ﬁeld a candidate in the 2018
presidential election, but does seek a share
of power. Mr Márquez says, “We want to be
the government or part of it.”
So far, however, the FARC’s image re-
mains too toxic for most politicians to snap
selﬁes with Mr Londoño. The party invited
a wide range of politicians to its conven-
tion, but none showed up. And Mr Uribe
and fellow opponents of the peace deal
continue to criticise its implementation.
Moreover, FARC members fear falling
victim to the political violence they have
now renounced. Since they began demobi-
lising in January, at least 17 of them or their
relatives have been killed. Even though the
ELN, a smaller leftist guerrilla force, has
agreed to a temporary ceaseﬁre, and the
leader of the country’s strongest criminal
gang has oﬀered to surrender, illegal armed
groups continue to operate in Colombia. 

1

Correction: On August 19th we said that Newfoundland
and Labrador faces a second year of recession. Statistics
Canada estimates that its economy grew in 2016. Sorr y.

34 The Amer icas

2

None of the 17 murders has been solved.
The FARC’s ﬁrst political test will be at
congressional elections in 2018. The accord
grants the party ﬁve seats for two terms in
both houses of Congress. The FARC will
seek to have sympathisers elected in 16 spe-
cial districts set up by the peace deal,
where it may enjoy surprising support. For
years, it acted as a de facto state in rural ar-
eas with scarce public services. Voters in
such regions will probably look kindly on
the infrastructure and development pro-
jects the FARC extracted in peace talks.
The FARC’s convention ended with a
concert. People cheered, danced and ﬂew
ﬂags with its new rose-and-star logo. Public
support for the FARC still makes Colombi-
ans uncomfortable. But they are better oﬀ
with ex-guerrillas wielding instruments in
the streets rather than guns in the jungle. 7

The Canadian-Amer ican border

Delay, delay, delay

W I N D S O R , O N T A R I O

The owner of one bridge tries and fails
to stop construction of another
IN 1929 Joseph Bower built what was then
the world’s longest suspension bridge
between Detroit, Michigan, and Windsor,
Ontario. He called it
the Ambassador
Bridge to symbolise Canadian-American
friendship. But there is nothing neigh-
bourly about the battle between Manuel
Moroun, who bought the bridge in 1979,
and Canada’s government, which wants a
rival span built 2km (1.2 miles) away.
The Ambassador Bridge is a glaring
bottleneck. More than 10,000 lorries, mak-
ing up 28% of all goods trade between Can-
ada and America, cross it every day. In
Windsor, the bridge disgorges traﬃc into
narrow city streets. “You can drive from
Montreal to Miami and only hit 17 stop-
lights,” an old truckers’ joke goes. “And all
17 are in Windsor, Ontario.” Even a brief
bridge closure would be hugely disruptive.
In 2005 Canada unveiled plans for a
new bridge named after Gordie Howe, a
Canadian ice-hockey hero who played for
the Detroit Red Wings. It said the project
would create 23,000 jobs, attract invest-
ment and save exporters time and money.
It would also inﬂict collateral damage on
Mr Moroun: the Howe is expected to slash
the Ambassador’s toll income by 35-50%.
Mr Moroun has defended the status
quo tenaciously. He has argued that Cana-
da reneged on promises to improve road
links to the Ambassador. He successfully
lobbied for a statewide referendum on the
new bridge, only to see Michigan voters
support it. His companies refused to sell
properties needed for a new customs plaza

until Michigan’s government expropriated
them. And entities he controls have ﬁled
lawsuits against governments at all levels
on both sides. On August 29th a Michigan
judge dismissed one suit, which claimed
the state had illegally spent money on the
bridge without legislative approval.
Mr Moroun’s litigation has delayed
construction by about two years. How-
ever, he cannot stall indeﬁnitely. Canada
now has all the required approvals for the
crossing. An expressway between the site
of the new bridge and the highway on the
Canadian side was completed last year.
When the Michigan state legislature re-
fused to ﬁnance its share of the estimated
$4bn cost, Canada agreed to pay the entire
amount itself, with the American portion
to be paid back later via tolls. Michael Cau-
tillo, the head of the body overseeing the
bridge, conﬁdently predicted in August
that construction will start by 2018.
Mr Moroun still has lawsuits pending.
On September 6th his ﬁrm said that Cana-
da had approved the construction of an
adjacent span to replace the existing Am-
bassador Bridge, which would pose a
stronger competitor for the Howe. None-
theless, facing opposition from the auto
and trucking industries and from every
government with a say, Mr Moroun might
decide to sue for peace instead. After talks
with both sides last year, Dwight Duncan,
chairman of the new bridge authority, sug-
gested the Canadian government buy the
Ambassador Bridge. It is safe to predict that
Mr Moroun would drive a hard bargain. 7

The Economist September 9th 2017

Disappearances in Argentina

Where is Santiago
Maldonado?

J U J U Y

A missing-person case looms over
midterm elections
AFEW months ago Santiago Maldonado,
a 28-year-old craftsman and tattoo art-
ist, moved to Patagonia, motivated by an
aﬃnity for the indigenous Mapuche peo-
ple. On July 31st, according to his brother,
he visited a campsite in the province of
Chubut, where Mapuches are protesting to
demand title to their ancestral land. He in-
tended to participate in a ceremony for Pa-
chamama, an Andean goddess.
But on the morning of August 1st protes-
ters threw stones at a group of military po-
lice oﬃcers, injuring two of them. In re-
sponse, 32 oﬃcers entered the camp. The
police say they did not arrest anyone. But
four witnesses have told a judge they saw
the oﬃcers load Mr Maldonado into a
white truck. He has not been seen since.
The case has become a political Ror-
schach test in a divided country where
“disappearances” have a grim history. In
the 1970s a right-wing military dictatorship
abducted tens of thousands of citizens—no
one knows exactly how many. A large
number were murdered, often by being
thrown out of aeroplanes.
From 2003 to 2015 Argentina was ruled 

1

The big one hits
With winds reaching 185 miles (300km) per hour, Hurr icane Irma—one of the four
strongest Atlantic storms in recorded histor y—slammed into the eastern Car ibbean on
September 6th. It ﬁrst struck Barbuda, damaging 95% of buildings. Gaston Browne, the
pr ime minister of Antigua and Barbuda, said the island of 1,600 people was now “barely
habitable”. On St Martin, Irma destroyed the Car ibbean’s third-largest airport. The
storm’s eye then passed north of Puerto Rico and the Dominican Republic. Nine people
have been reported dead, and the toll is expected to r ise. Forecasting models predict
that Irma will veer towards Flor ida, which has not been hit by a major hurr icane in a
decade, and local oﬃcials have issued a mandator y evacuation order for Miami Beach.
Two other hurr icanes, Katia and Jose, have formed in the region and will follow Irma.

36 The Amer icas

The Economist September 9th 2017

2

by a left-wing couple: ﬁrst by Néstor Kirch-
ner, who died in 2010, and then by his wife
Cristina Fernández de Kirchner. Under
both presidents, many members of the dic-
tatorship were brought to justice. In 2015
voters opted for Mauricio Macri, a centre-
right former businessman. Mr Macri has
been less tolerant of protests that block
roads than his predecessors were, and dur-
ing his term prosecutors have detained Mi-
lagro Sala, an indigenous activist, on char-
ges of embezzling public funds. Now that
Mr Maldonado has vanished, the presi-
dent’s opponents are on edge.
On September 1st tens of thousands of

people marched in Buenos Aires. They
bore Mr Maldonado’s bearded, dread-
locked image, beneath a slogan plastered
across social media: “Where is Santiago
Maldonado?” For Mrs Kirchner, who
hopes to win back her old Senate seat at
mid-term elections in October, Mr Maldo-
nado’s disappearance oﬀers an opportuni-
ty to tie Mr Macri’s administration to the
bleakest chapters of Argentina’s past. “I
don’t want to go back to the times of dark-
ness,” she said on September 2nd.
The president has kept mum, while his
cabinet has sent mixed signals. The securi-
ty minister, Patricia Bullrich, has criticised

Mapuche activists for violent provocations
and Mr Maldonado’s family for failing to
aid the police. But Claudio Avruj, the hu-
man-rights secretary, says that investiga-
tors’ “strongest hypothesis points to the
police”. The government is oﬀering 2m pe-
sos ($116,000) for information on the case.
Some witnesses say they saw Mr Mal-
donado trying to cross a river to ﬂee the po-
lice, though reportedly he did not know
how to swim. Authorities are now search-
ing for him in Chile. His case is sure to dom-
inate headlines until the elections. But his
family say they can’t bear to see his face on
a ﬂag. They just want him back alive. 7

Bello

Rebuilding the radical centre

The appeal of Macronismo in Latin America
THE “pink tide” of left-wing hegemony
in Latin America has ebbed. Yet rather
than a period of strong centre-right gov-
ernment, what has followed in many
places is political polarisation. Consider
the campaigns for the heavy crop of elec-
tions in the region over the next year or so.
These begin with Argentina’s legisla-
tive contest next month, which features a
close battle in Buenos Aires province, the
key electoral district, between President
Mauricio Macri’s centre-right coalition
and Cristina Fernández de Kirchner, his
unrepentantly populist predecessor. Pres-
idential elections next year in Colombia
and Brazil may turn into a struggle be-
tween relatively hard left- and right-wing
candidates. Mexico’s race is shaping up to
be a referendum on Andrés Manuel Ló-
pez Obrador, the eternal populist candi-
date of the nationalist left. 
If opinion polls are to be believed,
most Latin Americans remain broadly in
the political centre. They want a market
economy, and better state social provi-
sion and public services. Yet in many
countries social-democratic parties have
moved left, while conservatives still
champion the idea of a minimal state.
Centrist reformers, strong in the 1990s, are
struggling. 
This diminished centre features tech-
nocrats who lack the popular touch
(think, for example, of Colombia’s Juan
Manuel Santos or Peru’s Pedro Pablo Kuc-
zynski) or outﬁts whose boundless prag-
matism has encouraged corruption (ex-
hibit A: Brazil’s PMDB party). In all its
guises, the centre is falling victim to vot-
ers’ disillusion with a political class that
has lost the idealism bestowed by the
democratic transitions of the 1980s and
now looks self-serving and out-of-touch. 
All this suggests that there is an oppor-
tunity for a renovated, radical centre.

Some Latin Americans who believe so are
inspired by Emmanuel Macron in France,
who formed a new party and almost im-
mediately won the presidency against ex-
tremists of both right and left. 
To have any chance, Latin American
centrists need new ideas. Andrés Velasco, a
successful ﬁnance minister in Michelle
Bachelet’s ﬁrst government in Chile, has
made a muscular eﬀort to provide some in
a forthcoming book with two colleagues.
In 2013 Mr Velasco ran unsuccessfully
against Ms Bachelet for the presidential
nomination of the New Majority coalition,
which under her aegis has veered sharply
to the left. He has since set up Ciudadanos,
a new centrist party (which takes its name
from a similar outﬁt in Spain).
The authors insist that the centre must
deﬁne itself not by what it is against but
what it is for: a liberal egalitarian ideology
that sees freedom not just as non-interfer-
ence but, in the spirit of Amartya Sen, an
Indian economist and philosopher, as the
absence of oppressive domination and the
opportunity for all to fulﬁl their potential.
Whereas the left emphasises state redistri-
bution, they draw on John Rawls, an Amer-

ican political philosopher, to stress equal
treatment for all citizens against the more-
or-less-subtle class- and race-based dis-
crimination from which Latin American
societies still suﬀer.
The centre’s commitment to gradual-
ism, pluralism and rationality are no
match for populists’ simplistic emotional
appeals. But liberals can oﬀer moral argu-
ments for a free and tolerant society
which can generate passion, they insist.
Having set out his manifesto, Mr Velasco
is standing for Chile’s Senate this year; he
plans a presidential run in 2021. 
Similar eﬀorts are under way else-
where. In Peru, Julio Guzmán, an econo-
mist, is trying to set up a new party. In Co-
lombia Sergio Fajardo, a centrist former
mayor of Medellín, is campaigning for the
presidency. Centrist
candidates may
emerge in Brazil, including Marina Silva,
who broke with the left-wing Workers’
Party and has set up a new party of the
centre-left which espouses environmen-
talism, liberalism and clean politics. 
These eﬀorts at renovation face resis-
tance from the political establishment. Mr
Guzmán was disqualiﬁed, on a legal tech-
nicality, from last year’s presidential elec-
tion in Peru when he was in second place
in opinion polls. In Chile, Ciudadanos
faced a long bureaucratic battle to register
as a party, and as a result will run fewer
congressional candidates than it might
otherwise have done.
The antidote to populism “cannot just
be technocratic,” write Mr Velasco and his
co-authors. Rather, it requires a politics of
“radical frankness”; and decision-making
that is made palatable to voters by dia-
logue and constant appeal to the public
interest. Mr Macron won despite—or per-
haps because—he told the French some
things they didn’t want to hear. Will Latin
Americans warm to that message?

Middle East and Afr ica

The Economist September 9th 2017 37

Also in this section
38 Liber ia’s schools exper iment
38 Conser vation in the Seychelles
40 Dirty politics in South Afr ica
40 Migrants stuck in Libya
41 The last Jews of Egypt
42 Sunnis and Shias getting along

For daily analysis and debate on the Middle East
and Afr ica, visit
Economist.com/world/middle-east-afr ica 

as wakora (crooks) and claimed that their
decision was the work of “whites” and
“homosexuals”. He vowed to “ﬁx” the su-
preme court if re-elected.
Yet perhaps it should have been less of
a surprise than it was. Kenya’s election was
certainly far from perfect. A week before
polling day, Chris Msando, the main tech-
nician in charge of the electronic voter-ID
system, was found murdered, his body dis-
playing signs of torture. That created suspi-
cion that things might go awry. 
Though polling day itself went smooth-
ly, the transmission of results from polling
stations was erratic. The results were sup-
posed to have been recorded on 41,000-
odd paper forms, one from each station.
Yet
the electoral commission failed to
make many of the forms readily available
to the public or to NASA. That could have
been because of incompetence rather than
foul play—a view shared by many of the
Western monitors, who nonetheless
stressed that their endorsement of the elec-
tion was conditional on further analyses.
Either way, the supreme court decided, by
a verdict of four to two, that the ﬂaws were
serious enough to merit a re-run of the
presidential contest. The other ﬁve sets of
elections, including for members of parlia-
ment and for governors, were deemed fair.
Organising a better election will be
fraught. The original vote cost some
$500m and involved more than 300,000
temporary workers. Now the electoral
commission has to repeat it, in a far shorter
time, under heavier pressure. After it pub-
lished its intended date for the new poll, in
which only Mr Odinga and Mr Kenyatta
would be running (and third-party candi-
dates excluded), NASA accused it of be-
coming “rogue and unhinged”. The alli-
ance has published a list of demands for 

1

Kenyan politics

The rematch

After judges overturned its presidential election, Kenya is on edge
IF AT ﬁrst you don’t succeed, try, try again.
that they did not need proof of systematic
That, it seems, is the advice of Kenya’s su-
rigging. That
the electoral commission
preme court to its electoral commission. In
committed “irregularities and illegalities”,
a shock decision on September 1st, the
particularly in the transmission of results
court ruled that the presidential election
from polling stations to tallying centres,
held last month, in which Uhuru Kenyatta,
was enough to justify a new vote.
the incumbent, beat Raila Odinga (pic-
The decision surprised nearly every-
tured), an opposition stalwart, was “inval-
one. Even before the election results were
id, null and void”. The vote, it said, had not
declared, James Orengo, a senator and
been conducted in accordance with the
close ally of Mr Odinga, announced that
constitution—so it must be redone.
“going to court is not an alternative—we
As a display of judicial independence,
have been there before.” In the previous
the court’s decision is without precedent,
election, in 2013, when Mr Kenyatta beat
not just in Kenya but across Africa, where it
Mr Odinga in a contest that most monitors
was widely acclaimed. It represents an op-
considered ﬂawed, the loser went in vain
portunity—so optimists believe—to build
to court rather than risk a repeat of the vio-
genuine trust in the country’s institutions,
lence that had followed the election in
especially its highest courts. Yet it also
2007, when around 1,400 people were
plunges east Africa’s biggest economy
killed. This time, when the National Super
back into uncertainty and creates a new
Alliance (NASA), Mr Odinga’s group of par-
risk of violence. Arguments have already
ties, ﬁled its legal challenge it seemed like a
erupted over the timing of the new vote,
concession to foreign diplomats, who
which the electoral commission says it will
feared more violence.
hold on October 17th. Many Kenyans fear
widespread violence is likelier this time
around, especially if the result is closer.
The court has not yet published its full
verdict. But in a preliminary statement it
said it found “no evidence of misconduct”
on Mr Kenyatta’s part. Nor did it endorse
Mr Odinga’s theory that the electronic sys-
tem used to record the results was hacked.
Rather, the judges seem to have decided

Courting controversy
Mr Odinga and his allies were jubilant at
the decision. NASA declared that a “new
Kenya has been born” and claimed vindi-
cation for their view that the election had
been stolen. Mr Kenyatta called for the de-
cision to be respected in a speech given in
English. But in comments to supporters
made in Swahili, he denounced the judges

38 Middle East and Afr ica

The Economist September 9th 2017

Liber ian schools

Classroom experiments

A pioneering education reform makes a promising start
WHEN 14 years of civil war ended in
Partnership Schools for Liberia (PSL), a
2003, Liberia was left with decrepit
pilot scheme run by the education min-
schools. Many children carried Kalash-
istry with help from Ark, a British educa-
nikovs rather than textbooks. Since then
tion group. Drawing on American charter
Liberian governments have tried to start
schools and English academies, last year
afresh. But, in part because of the out-
the ministry delegated the management
break of Ebola in 2014, eﬀorts to improve
of 93 public schools to eight independent
education have made halting progress. 
operators, three of which are private
The consequences are grim. Less than
ﬁrms. Policymakers from countries such
40% of school-age children attend prim-
as Ghana, India and Nigeria are watching
PSL as they consider trying similar ideas. 
ary school. By the time they are 18, girls
Initial results from PSL suggest that
are more likely to be married than liter-
ate. Just one woman in four who has
would be wise. On September 7th re-
ﬁnished primary school can read a sen-
searchers from two think-tanks, the
tence. According to a study published in
Centre for Global Development and
2014, more than 40% of girls have been
Innovations for Poverty Action, pub-
asked for sex in return for better grades,
lished their analysis of the scheme’s ﬁrst
money or school supplies. 
year. On average, pupils at PSL schools
One reason for optimism, however, is
spent about twice as much time learning
as their peers at ordinary schools—a
result of them turning up more often,
relatively diligent teaching and longer
school days. Some operators did better
than others. But overall, pupils at PSL
schools made roughly an additional
seven months’ worth of progress in
English and maths compared with chil-
dren at typical public institutions. 
These beneﬁts came at a cost. Liberia’s
government typically spends about $50
per pupil per year. PSL schools could dip
into a philanthropic pot and spend twice
that amount. A few operators then added
their own funding. Bridge International
Academies, a company that runs 25
schools, spent several times more than
most other operators. 
George Werner, the outgoing educa-
tion minister, expects costs to fall over the
next two years of PSL. He hopes his suc-
cessor will keep the pilot after Liberia’s
general election on October 10th. That
would provide more time for schools to
improve—and for pupils to learn. 

Laughing and learning

2 the new vote, including suspending six se-
nior oﬃcials and hiring a new contractor to
print ballot papers. If they are not met, it
says it will not take part.
Many Kenyans guess that, in the end,
the result will be the same—and that Mr
Odinga and his allies will still not accept it.
Certainly, thanks to the supreme court’s
decision, NASA will have gained momen-
tum. But for all its ﬂaws, it is still not obvi-
ous that the election was rigged by any-
where near the margin of nine percentage
points that Mr Kenyatta had over Mr Od-
inga. (Mr Kenyatta’s party easily defeated
Mr Odinga’s in the parliamentary election,
albeit that the opposition split into sepa-

rate parties competing against each other.)
In a presidential re-run Mr Kenyatta, who is
better funded and organised, is still likely
to be the favourite, says Nicholas Cheese-
man, a specialist in African elections at the
University of Birmingham.
Protests after this year’s vote left at least
two dozen people dead. But for the most
part Kenya has avoided the violence that
marred earlier polls. The court’s decision is
intended to reinforce that progress by
building trust in the country’s institutions
and in the fairness of elections. Yet those
high hopes could still be dashed to smith-
ereens. The coming months will jangle
Kenyan nerves. 7

SOMALIA

K EN YA

Nairobi

TANZANIA

Exclusive
Economic
Zone

Victoria

S E Y CH E L L E S

COMOROS

MOZAMBIQUE

MADAGASCAR

500 km

I N D I A N
O C E A N

MAURITIUS

The Seychelles

Debt relief for
dolphins

N A I R O B I

An innovative agreement aims to
protect the water around the Seychelles
THE Seychelles is an archipelago of 115
mostly tiny islands, whose collective
area, at 460 sq km, is only about a third of
London’s. But the country’s granite islands
and coral atolls sit within an exclusive eco-
nomic zone of 1.4m sq km. It is here, in the
ocean, that conservationists are working
on a new way for small countries to protect
their marine environment.
The Seychelles’ economy relies on tou-
rism and tuna. These depend on healthy
seas. But paying for conservation is a chal-
lenge, says Didier Dogley, the environment
minister. So last year the country struck a
deal with The Nature Conservancy (TNC),
an American NGO. It promised to protect
30% of its waters by 2020—half of this area
will be oﬀ-limits to ﬁshing. In return, TNC
bought up $21.6m of debt owed by the Sey-
chelles to the Paris Club of international
creditors. It will allow the country to pay it
back at a lower interest rate over a longer
period.
Some of the money that the Seychelles
saves on interest payments will go into a
“climate adaptation trust”, which will
hand out $280,000 a year. The ﬁrst batches
will go towards training ﬁshermen to use
more sea-friendly techniques, conducting
research on ﬁsh populations and monitor-
ing the new 400,000 sq km reserve, which
will be among the largest in the world. A
further $150,000 a year will go into an en-
dowment that will continue to fund ma-
rine conservation in the future.
The complex deal took four years to
thrash out. Still, not everyone is happy.
Some ﬁshermen worry that their favourite
spots will become no-go zones. “The bone
of contention is where these areas are go-
ing to be,” says Rebecca Loustau-Lalanne,
an oﬃcial in the Seychelles’ Blue Economy
Department, which pursues sustainable 

1

40 Middle East and Afr ica

2 ocean-based development.
The blue economy is a new idea, but
like the green economy it is catching on.
The World Bank is backing a planned $15m
“blue bond” for the Seychelles, which will
fund sustainable ﬁsheries. TNC is planning
its own blue bonds, which would under-
pin deals similar to the one it agreed with
the Seychelles. “I can see doing a billion
dollars of these deals in a decade,” says
Rob Weary, TNC’s ﬁnancial guru.
More will be needed. Schools of alba-
core, bigeye, skipjack and yellowﬁn tuna
circulate widely in the western Indian
Ocean. Sustainable ﬁshing is a task for ev-
ery country with a stake. Already Mauriti-
us is looking to copy parts of the Seychelles
deal. Madagascar, Mozambique, Tanzania
and the Comoro Islands have also shown
interest. “It would be good to get every-
body on board,” says Mr Dogley. 
Healthy seas mean more of the charis-
matic marine fauna that make the region
so attractive to scuba-diving tourists. Debt
relief for dolphins makes sense. 7

South Afr ican politics

Getting nasty

J O H A N N E S B U R G

The race to lead the African National
Congress has turned ugly
SOUTH AFRICA’S ruling party, the Afri-
can National Congress (ANC), is on the
verge of tearing itself apart with “dirty
tricks”, says Gwede Mantashe, its secre-
tary-general. As the ANC prepares to elect
new leaders at a conference in December, a
vicious battle is under way. The ﬁght is
broadly between those aligned with the
party’s current leader, Jacob Zuma, who is
the president of the country, and those
who want to break his grip on the ANC.
Mr Zuma would like to see his ex-wife,
Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma, the former
head of the African Union, succeed him as
leader of the ANC. Cyril Ramaphosa, the
deputy president, is her strongest oppo-
nent and, he claims, the victim of a “dirty
war” by his comrades. Earlier this month
his personal e-mails were hacked and
leaked to a pro-Zuma newspaper editor,
supposedly revealing extramarital aﬀairs
with at least eight women.
The story probably did Mr Ramaphosa
no serious harm, not least because Mr
Zuma has set new standards in that area.
He has had several aﬀairs and is currently
married to four women. He was acquitted
of rape; his accuser ﬂed the country in ter-
ror. Mr Ramaphosa, for his part, admitted
to having had an aﬀair eight years ago. He
has since reconciled with his wife. The oth-
er allegations are false, he says.

The public appears more concerned
about the shady way in which the e-mails
of Mr Ramaphosa, who is running on an
anti-corruption platform, were obtained.
“We now need to confront the likelihood
that state agencies and resources are being
abused to promote factional political agen-
das,” he said.
South Africa has a long and disturbing
history of politically motivated dirty tricks.
During apartheid, the police sowed divi-
sions by planting false stories in the press.
For Mr Ramaphosa, the attacks will bring
back memories of his previous bid to lead
the ANC. Hoping to succeed Nelson Man-
dela in 1997, he faced malicious rumours
about everything from his work to his sex-
uality. He lost out to Thabo Mbeki, who
would become president.
Mr Zuma has put loyalists in key posi-
tions at state security agencies. “They have
got every bit of dirty information on every-
one,” says Susan Booysen of the Universi-
ty of the Witwatersrand. Some critics of
the president have been subjected to death
threats; others, smear campaigns. When
Mr Zuma ﬁred Pravin Gordhan, the ﬁnance
minister, earlier this year, he cited a dodgy
intelligence report that claimed Mr Gord-
han held secret meetings to undermine the
government. Mr Gordhan, who sought to
curb waste and corruption, was repeatedly
threatened with dubious charges. He has
remained outspoken—and is now facing
renewed legal threats.
The stakes of the ANC leadership battle
are high for Mr Zuma. His successor will
also be the party’s presidential candidate
in 2019 and therefore might eventually be
in a position to shield him from prosecu-
tion. Mr Zuma faces 783 charges of corrup-
tion, which he denies. His next court hear-
ing is this month. Were she to become
president, Ms Dlamini-Zuma would be in a
position to pardon the father of her chil-
dren. Few think she will challenge the cro-
nyism that has come to deﬁne the ANC un-
der Mr Zuma.
The nastiness is expected to increase as
the ANC’s conference draws closer. A re-
cent survey of members shows Ms Dla-
mini-Zuma lagging behind Mr Ramaphosa
and other candidates in popularity. Her
supporters may be trying to make up
ground in other ways. Thousands of party
branches are choosing their delegates for
the conference. Critics of the president
warn that branches that decide to back
candidates like Mr Ramaphosa are being
disbanded. In KwaZulu-Natal province, Mr
Zuma’s base and home to the largest num-
ber of ANC members, disputes have
turned bloody. “While Ramaphosa and
the six or so other contenders battle the
smears against them, something more sin-
ister and insidious is unfolding,” writes
Justice Malala, a political columnist. “The
December election is being rigged right in
front of them.” 7

The Economist September 9th 2017

Mediterranean migrants

Stuck on shore

C A I R O

Why the number of migrants crossing
the Mediterranean is falling
OVER the past three summers, tens of
thousands of migrants piled into
boats to make the perilous journey across
the Mediterranean. This summer, though,
the sea was unusually empty. Since the
European Union and Turkey struck a deal
in 2016—in eﬀect closing the eastern route
to Greece—Italy has been the main destina-
tion for migrants. But the number of arriv-
als there in July was down by more than
half compared with last year. In August it
fell even further: fewer than 4,000 people
came ashore, against more than 21,000 in
August 2016. It was the lowest monthly ﬁg-
ure recorded in nearly two years.
No one quite knows why. Italy has pro-
vided equipment and training to Libya’s
coastguard, which has stepped up patrols.
The seas have also been rough. But two mi-
litias in the western city of Sabratha,
thought to be behind much of the people-
smuggling, have a diﬀerent explanation.
They claim that Italy oﬀered them money
and equipment to stop migrant boats from
setting sail.
Italy denies that it is talking with the
traﬃckers. But it does work closely with
Fayez al-Serraj, the head of the UN-backed
government based in Tripoli, the capital.
The EU has given him tens of millions of
dollars to improve the coastguard and pro-
vide new jobs for those involved in traﬃck-
ing. Mr Serraj, in turn, reportedly struck 

1

Libya’s version of catch and release

The Economist September 9th 2017 

Middle East and Afr ica 41

S P A I N

I TA L Y

Rome

M e d . Sea  

GR E E C E

TURK E Y

The last Jews of Egypt

Out of the shadows

C A I R O

TUN I S IA

Lampedusa

Tripoli

Zuwara
Sabratha

Cairo

EG YP T

A L G E R I A

M A L I

N IG ER

L I B Y A

F E Z Z A N

CHAD

Migration routes

S U D A N

Major 

Source: ICMPD

Minor
600 km

2

deals with the militias and brought them
onto the government payroll. “I don’t think
anyone came from Europe with a suitcase
full of money and gave it to Libyan war-
lords,” says Mattia Toaldo of the European
Council on Foreign Relations, a think-tank.
“It’s more complicated than that.” 
Any such deal would be unpopular in
Libya, because it would strengthen the
armed groups that have plunged the coun-
try into chaos. But it is unlikely to meet
much criticism in Italy, where the arrival of
so many migrants has created a political
crisis. Over a four-day period in June, res-
cue boats pulled 12,000 people out of the
water. Some mayors have refused to accept
new arrivals. Their more welcoming col-
leagues have been punished at the polls. In
April, the mayor of Lampedusa won a
UNESCO award for helping migrants. In
June, voters on the small island tossed her
out of oﬃce. She came third out of four can-
didates, with less than 24% of the vote.
Italy has also tried to seal the far end of
the people-smuggling route, in Fezzan, a
vast area of desert that borders Algeria,
Chad and Niger. It is Libya’s poorest region.
Though it has oil wells capable of produc-
ing 400,000 barrels per day, residents re-
ceive few beneﬁts; producers ﬂy in staﬀ
from the north. A large state-run farming
complex has fallen into disrepair since the
civil war in 2011. With few chances for legal
employment, tribes in Fezzan have turned
to smuggling. The migrant trade brings in
perhaps $1bn annually.
In April, the Italian interior ministry ne-
gotiated a peace deal between two war-
ring groups in the region. In exchange for
money, they agreed to stop ﬁghting and
work to close the borders. There is little evi-
dence that they have done the latter. With
so few Mediterranean crossings this sum-
mer, aid agencies believe tens of thou-
sands of migrants are stranded in Libya.
Some are kept in detention centres run by
militias in the north, or held for ransom in
grim “safe houses”. Others stay in the
south and ﬁnd ill-paid informal jobs.
There is one other explanation for the

side the country.
But since the revolution in 2011,
Egypt’s leaders have reached out to local
Jews. In 2012 a leader of the then-ruling
Muslim Brotherhood broke a taboo by
calling on those who were expelled to
return. In 2015 state television broadcast
“The Jewish Quarter”, a soap opera that
depicted Jews in a positive light. Last
month the antiquities ministry began
work on a $6m project to restore the roof
of Alexandria’s synagogue.
Some see the moves as an eﬀort to
win over Western governments; others
say that they are only happening now
because there are so few Jews left. But it
might also be that after four decades of
relative peace with Israel, Egypt is coming
to terms with its Jews.

Muslims in Egypt are trying to preserve its Jewish heritage
IN BUT a few years one of the world’s
oldest Jewish communities will have
disappeared. No more than 20 Jews are
thought to remain in Egypt, compared
with at least 80,000 before the second
world war. Half a dozen live in Cairo—
four of them in care homes. But Magda
Haroun (pictured), a sprightly 65-year-
old, wants to keep their memories alive.
She has formed an association, Drop of
Milk, dedicated to preserving Egypt’s
Jewish heritage. Of its 20 active mem-
bers, she is the only Jew.
Some members have Jewish fathers
who converted to Islam to avoid ex-
pulsion under Gamal Abdel Nasser,
Egypt’s former dictator, an aggressive
Arab nationalist. Others married Jews.
Most simply want to preserve Egypt’s
pluralist past. “We’re reopening a page of
history that was deleted from our text-
books,” says Amir Ramsis, who directed
a documentary about Jews in Egypt.
There are 12 synagogues left in Cairo.
Many are in poor shape. The group is
based in one of them, called Sha’ar Hash-
amayim (Gate of Heaven), and it plans to
turn others into cultural centres. Mem-
bers talk hopefully of a “renaissance”.
Twice a week they will gather to learn
Hebrew so that they can catalogue the
20,000 books in the basement of Sha’ar
Hashamayim. They want to create an
exhibition of Egypt’s Jewish history in
the synagogue and to protect other sites,
such as the Jewish cemetery in Cairo.
Some do not share the group’s enthu-
siasm. Egypt has fought four wars against
Israel. Even Jews who worked alongside
Egyptians against British colonialism
were branded enemies of the state and
expelled. Some of those who remain
prefer to keep a low proﬁle. American
Jewish groups believe Egypt’s Jewish
heritage would be better protected out-

Let my people be remembered

reduced ﬂow, and it may be the most com-
pelling. “The smuggling business is a busi-
ness. It’s all about money,” says Claudia
Gazzini of the International Crisis Group, a
Brussels-based think-tank. The traﬃckers
may have simply found a more lucrative
business. Petrol is heavily subsidised in
Libya: a litre costs $0.12 at the oﬃcial ex-
change rate and just two cents at the black-
market rate. Smugglers can sell it in Europe
(or neighbouring Tunisia) at a huge
mark-up. The business is thought to be
worth $2bn annually—a sum that dwarfs
any aid on oﬀer from Europe.
The western port of Zuwara, once a hub

for the migrant trade, has lately switched to
smuggling fuel. Residents complain of pet-
rol shortages because so much of the sup-
ply is stolen. Libyan ships are thought to
bring the petrol out to international wa-
ters, then transfer it to non-Libyan tankers.
A team of UN investigators said in June that
they had seen “vessels showing suspicious
navigational patterns” near the city. But
stopping petrol-smuggling is not a high pri-
ority for the European navies that patrol
the Mediterranean. “It creates a lot less so-
cial alarm than the migrants or drugs,” says
Mr Toaldo. “You won’t see people com-
plaining about smuggling petrol.” 7

42 Middle East and Afr ica

Saudi Arabia’s foreign policy

Sunnis and Shias: enemies no more?

The Economist September 9th 2017

raid on Sana’a on August 25th which killed
14 civilians. A Saudi spokesman suggested
reopening Sana’a’s airport and Yemen’s
largest port, Hodeida, under UN auspices.
Some Saudi oﬃcials say they want to
woo back Iran’s Arab allies, putting ethnic-
ity above religion, in order to push back Ira-
nian inﬂuence. “The more you engage with
Iraqis, the less the Iranians will come,” says
one. “Iraq belongs to the Arab world.” 
Some observers foresee a rapproche-
ment between Saudi Arabia and Iran, talk-
ing of a grand bargain whereby the Saudis
might recognise Iran’s pre-eminence in the
north of the Middle East, including Syria,
in exchange for a Saudi free hand in the
Gulf states and the Arabian peninsula. 
But Mr Jubeir dismisses such talk as
“laughable”. “When you hear honeyed
words from [President Hassan] Rouhani’s
government [in Iran], we see the aggressive
actions of its Revolutionary Guard,” says a
Saudi oﬃcial, alleging Iranian-inspired ter-
rorist plots in Kuwait and Bahrain and la-
menting Iran’s meddling in Yemen. 
Any progress will be diﬃcult. The king-
dom is wary of being seen to appease Iran.
For Shia-dominated Iraq’s leaders to em-
brace the Saudis will not be easy either. Mr
Sadr was lambasted at home for meeting
Prince Muhammad, just when Saudi
forces were levelling Awamiya, a Shia
town in eastern Saudi Arabia outraged by
Mr Nimr’s execution. Some Saudis, for
their part, were aghast when the prince
congratulated Mr Abadi for defeating Is-
lamic State in Mosul—and clobbering the
old part of one of Sunni Islam’s greatest
and most beautiful cities. 7

cial capital, with one of Iraq’s ﬁeriest Shia
clerics, Muqtada al-Sadr. “Sunni hardline
and Shia hardline doesn’t build nations or
societies,” tweeted one Saudi minister. 
The kingdom plans to open a consulate
in Najaf, the spiritual capital of Shia Islam
in southern Iraq, and to lay on direct ﬂights
for thousands of Saudi Shias to visit its
Imam Ali shrine. “Sectarianism has to
wane,” says Adel al-Jubeir, the Saudi for-
eign minister. “The region is calming
down.” He cites the winding down of the
war in Syria, and the throttling of Islamic
State’s jihadist “caliphate”.
Indeed, the Saudis have shifted on Syr-
ia, too. Saudi clerics used to urge on Sunni
mujahideen against the supposedly hereti-
cal Alawite clan ruling Syria with their Ira-
nian allies. Now they have toned it down,
lest they be accused of abetting terrorism.
Prince Muhammad is said to have stopped
backing Syria’s Sunni rebels and urged
their leaders in exile in Riyadh to compro-
mise with President Bashar al-Assad’s
ghastly regime. 
The Saudis are still bombing northern
Yemen. But there, too, they are sounding
more conciliatory and keener to make a
deal. Unusually, they apologised for an air-

The Saudis may be stretching out the hand of peace to their old foes
FROM the forecourt of the Prophet Mu-
hammad’s mosque in Medina during
the annual haj pilgrimage, which ended on
September 4th, came the still, small voice
of Shias praying. Saudi security guards
fanned them helpfully against the heat. At
the al-Baqi cemetery nearby, the resting
place of many of the Prophet’s descen-
dants, Sunni vigilantes and puritans
scowled at Shia worshippers but, in con-
trast with previous years, they held back
from beating them with sticks. And as over
2.3m Muslims perambulated around Mec-
ca’s great black basalt stone, the Kaaba,
Prince Khalid al-Faisal, the province’s go-
vernor, singled out 86,000 Iranians for a
special welcome.
Change may be afoot in Saudi Arabia’s
hostile relations with Shias and their
champion, Iran. For decades the kingdom
has been the font of Sunni Islam’s anti-
Shia dogma. The media issued screeds
against
the rawaﬁdh, or
rejectionists,
deemed beyond the pale of proper Islam.
But this year the oft-troubled haj was ex-
ceptional for its inclusiveness, and for
passing oﬀ with no major incident despite
a 20% jump in the number of pilgrims. Iran
made a point of thanking the Saudis.
On ascending the throne in 2015, King
Salman bin Abdelaziz and his young son
and defence minister, Muhammad, set
their sights on rolling back Iran’s inﬂuence
from the region by force. They waged war
on Iran’s Houthi allies in Yemen, who had
seized control of Sana’a, the capital. They
rejected demands for compensation for
the hundreds of Iranian pilgrims killed in a
stampede in Mecca in 2015. The following
year they beheaded Nimr al-Nimr, a rowdy
Saudi Shia cleric. They cut oﬀ diplomatic
relations with Iran and spearheaded a
grand military alliance of Sunni states. No
more of the old “comatose”, consensual
politics, said Saudi oﬃcials.
Two years on, Prince Muhammad, who
since June has been crown prince, may be
thinking anew. Rather than confront Iran’s
various satellites, he is wooing them and
their Shia rulers. He has renewed ties with
Iraq that had been severed 25 years ago,
this month reopening borders for people
and goods for the ﬁrst time since 1990. He
sent his chief of staﬀ to Baghdad to sign a
deal on intelligence sharing, and brought
Iraqi trade delegations to Riyadh, his capi-
tal. In June he hosted Iraq’s Shia prime
minister, Haider al-Abadi. In July he sat
smiling in Jeddah, Saudi Arabia’s commer-

Assad to their rescue 
The Syr ian army pushed into the eastern city of Deir ez-Zor on September 5th, breaking
the three-year-old siege of a government-held enclave by Islamic State (IS). It is a
victor y for Bashar al-Assad, Syr ia’s blood-soaked dictator, and yet another defeat for the
jihadists, whose self-proclaimed caliphate is shr inking fast. Amer ican-backed Kurdish
and Arab ﬁghters have dr iven IS out of most of Raqqa, its putative capital, 140km to the
west. The group is expected to make its last stand in a r ibbon of towns, including Deir
ez-Zor, along the Euphrates r iver.

Europe

Germany

Agenda 2021

W E I M A R

’Stag parties

Germany’s struggling Social Democrats are already looking to the next election
IF GERMANY’S centre-left Social Demo-
party’s struggle for distinctiveness. For a
crats (SPD) have a future, it probably
start, being in the grand coalition makes it
looks like Carsten Schneider. The dynamic
hard to attack the CDU: “The economy’s
41-year-old MP grew up in a tough Platten-
going well, wages are rising, unemploy-
bau, or communist-era tower block, but
ment is lower than ever,” conceded Mr
says he was made by the local school:
Schneider. Here in the state of Thuringia
the SPD is a junior partner in a government
“That’s social democracy,” he tells a crowd
in Weimar. “The risk of poverty is especial-
led by the (relatively pragmatic) local
ly high among single parents,” he explains,
branch of the Left party, a merger of former
“and 90% of the time that is single moth-
East German communists and Western so-
ers.” He goes on to describe how he suc-
cial democrats who quit the SPD over its
cessfully pushed to raise the age limit for
certain sorts of child beneﬁt payments. Po-
lite applause greets him. 
Around the corner, amid the sausage
stands of Weimar’s bustling marketplace,
voters seem unappreciative. Asked about
the SPD, one woman sipping a beer replies:
“They are not so bad…but they bring too
little. They don’t have enough imagination
to get things done.” “Too obstinate”, adds
her neighbour. 
The SPD has been in a “grand coalition”
with Angela Merkel’s Christian Democrats
(CDU) for four years. It has achieved rather
a lot, including a minimum wage, quotas
for women on boards and gay marriage.
And in Martin Schulz (pictured), its candi-
date for the chancellery, it has a moderate,
clubbable leader. But with the Bundestag
election on September 24th growing close,
the party is scoring only around 23% in the
polls; the level of its lowest-ever vote-
share, in 2009. Why is it doing so badly?
The scene in Weimar sums up the

Germany
2017 general election polling, at Sep 3rd, %
CDU/CSU 37.4
SPD 23.1
AfD 9.6
The Lef t 9.3
FDP 8.6
Greens 7.4
50

Possible coalitions, based on latest polling, %
0
10
20
30
40
50

Sources: Wahlrecht.de; The Economist

Par ties polling under 5% typically win no seats

S O N D J

F M A M J

J

A

S

“Jamaica”

CDU/CSU

Election day

CDU/CSU

FDP Gr.

Grand

40

30

20

10

0

60

2016

2017

SPD

The Economist September 9th 2017 43

Also in this section
44 Good economic news from Italy
44 Turkey tortures again
45 Reviving the battle of Manzikert
46 Charlemagne: Exorcising French
demons

For daily analysis and debate on Europe, visit
Economist.com/europe

liberalising “Agenda 2010” welfare and la-
bour reforms. And Weimar is also bespan-
gled with posters of the centre-left Greens
and the right-wing, but economically stat-
ist, Alternative for Germany (AfD). 
There is not just more competition for
the traditional social-democratic vote; that
vote is also shrinking. In 2000, 37% of Ger-
man voters were in blue-collar work; to-
day the ﬁgure is 19%. In Thuringia, for ex-
ample, old industries like textiles have
given way to laser technology, optics and
tourism. The SPD used to come ﬁrst in the
state in Bundestag elections. This time it
may come fourth, after the CDU, the Left
and the AfD. 
When Mr Schulz emerged as the party’s
chancellor candidate in January—Sigmar
Gabriel, the former leader, resigned to be-
come foreign minister—he looked like a
credible answer to the SPD’s problems. He
had folksy appeal, having spent 11 years as
mayor of a small town in the Rhineland.
He distanced himself from Agenda 2010.
He could also oﬀer international gravitas,
having until January been president of the
European Parliament. That also meant he
was unsullied by the compromises of the
grand coalition. If anyone could revive
what remained of the SPD’s traditional
base and meld it with urban liberals and
middling Merkel voters, it was surely he. 
Initially the SPD surged, drawing al-
most level with the CDU in polls (see
chart). Then came three successive state
elections at which the party badly under-
performed. The last one was North-Rhine
Westphalia, Germany’s largest state, an
SPD stronghold and Mr Schulz’s own na-
tive Land. That seemed to seal his fate. 
Despairing, the party has been playing
the Trump card, disingenuously reimagin-
ing Mrs Merkel’s defence spending in-
creases (which they agreed to in govern-
ment) as an “arms race” designed to please 

1

44 Europe

2 the American president. “Trump is de-
manding a doubling of our defence bud-
get…Germany should become the top
peace power in the world!” Mr Gabriel told
the Weimar rally, to cheers. Yet this is not
enough for the SPD to diﬀerentiate itself
from the chancellor. At a debate on Sep-
tember 3rd Mr Schulz placidly nodded
along as Mrs Merkel spoke.
Manfred Güllner, head of the Forsa
polling agency, reckons the party has fo-
cused too much on social justice and
should have presented a broader pro-
gramme for modernising Germany. Others
suggest that Mr Schulz’s reluctance to rule
out a coalition with the Left at federal level
played a role (though doing so did not help
previous SPD candidates). One party insid-
er oﬀers perhaps the best explanation: the
SPD will struggle to win elections for as
long as Mrs Merkel remains in power. 
The party will face a choice after the
election: try to create another grand co-
alition or return to opposition. There are
few real policy diﬀerences between the
SPD and Mrs Merkel, and Mr Schulz would
surely relish working with her and Em-
manuel Macron of France to integrate the
euro zone further. But the demoralised
membership might well veto such a deal.
Many are looking to the next election,
in 2021. Mrs Merkel will probably have
gone by then. None of her prospective suc-
cessors looks particularly strong. And four
years back in opposition would give the
SPD a chance to renew and bring forward a
new generation, including ﬁgures like Mr
Schneider and Manuela Schwesig, minis-
ter-president of Mecklenburg-West Pomer-
ania. For the party, the upcoming vote may
be that rare thing: a genuinely good elec-
tion to lose. 7

Italy

Salute!

R O M E

At last, some good news from the
battered republic
AT THE end of each summer Italian busi-
ness leaders, politicians and journal-
ists mingle with foreign guests at the Am-
brosetti Forum in the Villa d’Este by the
shores of the lovely Lake Como. This year,
the breezes oﬀ the lake carried something
not scented in almost a decade: a whiﬀ of
optimism about the Italian economy.
GDP in the second quarter was up by an
annual 1.5%, and on September 5th the gov-
ernment’s statisticians said that leading in-
dicators pointed to “a reinforcement of the
prospects for growth”. The previous week,
they had sounded a less positive note, re-
porting that the unemployment rate had

Getting there

GDP, % change on a year earlier

Euro area

Italy

2007

09

11

13

15

17

Source: Haver Analytics

4

2

+

0

–

2

4

6

8

risen from 11.2% in June to 11.3% in July. But
even that held a kernel of promise. The un-
employment rate measures the proportion
of jobseekers out of work, and in July some
115,000 Italians became jobseekers. Not all
found jobs, which is why the unemploy-
ment rate went up. But those who did
pushed the total number in work to more
than 23m for the ﬁrst time since 2008. Ital-
ians, in other words, seem to be more
hopeful that there are at last jobs to be had.
The entrepreneurial can look forward
to easier credit too. A state bail-out in July
of Italy’s oldest and shakiest bank, Monte
dei Paschi di Siena, coupled with the res-
cue of two lenders in the Veneto region,
has left Italy’s troubled ﬁnancial sector
looking healthier. Its well-being should im-
prove as banks start selling oﬀ a mountain
of bad loans weighing on their balance
sheets. Italy’s caretaker prime minister,
Paolo Gentiloni, was on hand at the forum
to mop up congratulations. His govern-
ment has also engineered a sharp fall in the
number of migrants crossing the Mediterr-
anean from Libya.
Problems nevertheless remain. Even if
the new, rosier forecasts prove correct, the
Italian economy will still be a drag on the
euro zone. Latest ﬁgures show the single-
currency area growing at an annual 2.2%.
Still, the gap between Italy and the euro
zone as a whole is narrowing.
A labour-reform package brought in by
the previous government of Matteo Renzi
relied heavily on providing employers
with ﬁnancial incentives to give workers
steady jobs. Those incentives ran out last
year. A sharp rise in the proportion of em-
ployees on ﬁxed-term contracts points less
to labour-market ﬂexibility than to em-
ployers relying on easily disposable and
under-trained employees. Juvenile unem-
ployment remains a painful 35.5%.
There are external threats too. The
strength of the euro is bad news for a coun-
try that exports a lot outside the euro zone.
When the European Central Bank eventu-
ally stops buying government bonds, the
cost of reﬁnancing Italy’s huge public debt
(a whopping 132.6% of GDP at the end of
2016, one of the highest in the EU) will rise.

The Economist September 9th 2017

Marcello Messori, of LUISS university
in Rome, sees the large debt, which also
cramps the government’s ability to stimu-
late the economy, as one of Italy’s two most
important handicaps, the other being low
productivity. An encouraging number of
Italian ﬁrms are at the cutting edge of tech-
nological innovation. But, he says, their
knowledge diﬀuses only slowly to the rest.
In some cases, that is because the bosses of
small, often family-run companies are
wary of raising capital for innovative in-
vestment and so losing control. In others,
the resistance comes from big companies
that ﬁnd it easier to seek out cosy arrange-
ments in an economy with a big overlap
between the private and public sectors.
How willing Italy’s politicians will be to
shake up those arrangements remains to
be seen. Unless they can agree on a new
electoral law before the general election,
which has to be held by next May, the most
likely outcome is a hung parliament, with
either a minority government or a grand
coalition of left and right, neither of which
looks likely to pass radical structural re-
forms. Keep that prosecco on hold. 7

Human-r ights abuses in Turkey

Bruised and
battered

I S T A N B U L

A government that once vowed “zero
tolerance” for torture now practises it
THE masked special-ops oﬃcers barged
into their apartment in Diyarbakir, in
Turkey’s south-east, in the dead of a De-
cember night, says Tulay Yer-Celik. For the
next two hours Mrs Yer-Celik, her month-
old son and her mother-in-law listened as
the agents beat her husband, Omer, in the
next room. The violence ended only when
the police arrived. Mr Celik, a journalist for
the pro-Kurdish Dicle Haber Agency, one
of over 150 news outlets shut down since
last year’s bloody, abortive coup, was de-
tained in Diyarbakir for two weeks. He was
then transferred to a maximum-security
prison near Istanbul, where he remains.
His crime, according to an indictment that
appeared only in late June, was to have
published news stories based on the
hacked e-mails of Turkey’s energy minis-
ter. He faces a sentence of 16 years.
Turkey’s government, led by President
Recep Tayyip Erdogan, proclaimed a poli-
cy of “zero tolerance” for torture in the ear-
ly 2000s. But amid the fallout from last
year’s coup and a continuing crackdown
against Kurdish militants, tolerance is back.
Human-rights groups have cited instances
of beatings and torture, including rape and
threats of rape, in Turkish detention cen-
tres. A UN oﬃcial who visited Turkey late 

1

The Economist September 9th 2017 

Europe 45

Turkish histor y

Recalling Manzikert

A N K A R A

President Erdogan reaches back a millennium
IN A mighty motorcade, Turkey’s presi-
dent, Recep Tayyip Erdogan, descended
on the sleepy town of Malazgirt near the
Armenian frontier on August 26th. He
came to celebrate a millennium-old
victory that Turks hail as the dawn of
Muslim domination of these once-Chris-
tian lands. 
Largely forgotten in the West, the
battle of Manzikert in 1071 saw Seljuk
Turks, led by King Alp Arslan, crush an
imperial Byzantine army said to be twice
their size. This Turkic push into Anatolia
laid the foundation for the Seljuks’ even-
tual successors, the Ottomans, who took
Constantinople, the Byzantine capital, in
1453 and whose empire at its peak extend-
ed from the gates of Vienna to the Indian
Ocean.
Mr Erdogan’s commemoration of a
946-year-old battle is a bid to woo Turk-
ish nationalists. Having foiled a coup in
July last year and only narrowly won
sweeping powers in a constitutional
referendum in April, he is eager to ﬁnd
new supporters. At Malazgirt, the mod-
ern name for Manzikert, he linked the
failed coup to the medieval campaign. 
“We faced an assault on July 15th that
appeared to be a coup attempt but was
actually aimed at enslaving us…[we]

fought the same ﬁgures as Alp Arslan,”
Mr Erdogan told a crowd of thousands,
alluding to wild rumours of Western
interference. He was ﬂanked by men
posing as soldiers, clad in reproduction
chain mail and brandishing scimitars.
Other entertainment included displays
of horsemanship and archery.
Mr Erdogan, a devout Muslim who
often likes to rail against the West, chided
his predecessors for “neglecting” Man-
zikert. He has been dusting oﬀ other
episodes of martial history, presiding
over lavish festivities that include ﬁre-
works and a laser show to mark the
Ottoman victory of 1453. At Gallipoli, he
has exhorted Turks to venerate their ﬁnal
victory before the empire was defeated
in the ﬁrst world war and dismembered
by the victors.
“With a Turkish ﬂag in one hand and
Islam’s green banner in the other, our
victorious forebears entered Anatolia at
Manzikert and marched to the middle of
Europe with glory and honour,” the
president said. Yet historians agree that
Alp Arslan never set his eyes on Europe,
being more concerned with realms to the
south, including Baghdad and Damascus.
The priorities of Mr Erdogan today, it
seems, still lie in the same direction.

When the Turks rode in

Europe’s Committee for the Prevention of
Torture gave Mr Erdogan’s government a
detailed report on ill-treatment in Turkish
prisons. Turkey has not allowed its ﬁnd-
ings to be made public. EU politicians, in-
cluding Angela Merkel, have talked about
cancelling accession talks with Turkey, but
it has not happened.
Increasingly, the people who are trying
to expose the abuses have themselves
come under threat. Eight human-rights ac-

tivists, including Amnesty International’s
Turkey director and two European nation-
als, have been behind bars since July on
outlandish conspiracy charges. Journalists
face similar pressure. When photos of
some of the Sapatan villagers appeared on
social media, their backs covered with
bruises, the local governor’s oﬃce insisted
that the men had not been tortured. Re-
ports to the contrary, it added, bore the
mark of “terrorist propaganda”. 7

2

The iron ﬁst

last year called such abuse “widespread”.
Human Rights Watch, a pressure group,
has urged the government to investigate
the kidnappings of four people accused of
links to the Gulen movement, an Islamist
sect believed to have inspired the coup.
(The men are among the 110,000 civil ser-
vants purged from their jobs since last
summer.) One of the four resurfaced in po-
lice custody after six weeks. He has since
accused security personnel of torturing
him. Turkish oﬃcials rebuﬀ questions
about such cases. “There is no torture in de-
tention centres,” says one.
Similar outrages have come to light in
the country’s south-east, where at least
3,000 people have died in clashes between
the army and Kurdish militants, and in a
string of terrorist attacks, in the past two
years. On August 5th security forces res-
ponded to the killing of a policeman near
Sapatan, a Kurdish village, by forcing doz-
ens of residents out of their homes and
beating them in the local square. Of the 36
people detained, many were assaulted
with hoses and metal rods at the local po-
lice station, according to Kurdish politi-
cians who visited the area days later. 
A police oﬃcer was later suspended,
but investigations into such abuses remain
rare. Oﬃcials involved in counter-terro-
rism operations were granted immunity
from prosecution last year. Berat Albayrak,
the energy minister and the president’s
son-in-law, remarked last week that he was
tempted to strangle Gulenists whenever
he saw them. Only a few years ago, the rul-
ing Justice and Development party could
plausibly claim to have done away with
torture, notes Andrew Gardner of Amnes-
ty International. “Since 2015 this success
has been turned on its head,” he says.
The international response to all this
has been feeble. Nine months ago, follow-
ing a fact-ﬁnding mission, the Council of

46 Europe

The Economist September 9th 2017

Charlemagne

Exorcising French demons

Emmanuel Macron is trying to change nothing less than France’s psychology

simpler will favour jobs?” sniﬀed a group of politicians and intel-
lectuals in Le Monde, a newspaper, last year. Unlike its European
counterparts, the French Socialist Party never explicitly em-
braced a more moderate form of social democracy, because it is
“haunted by a Marxist superego” argued Manuel Valls, a former
Socialist prime minister. France’s problem, says a liberal com-
mentator, is that its society has never been démarxisé.
Enter the exorcists. On August 31st Edouard Philippe, Mr Mac-
ron’s prime minister, and Muriel Pénicaud, his labour minister,
walked out of their last spirit-chasing session with the unions
and into the parquet-ﬂoored salon next door to explain their re-
form plan. The product of all these summer talks, it gives ﬁrms
more ﬂexibility to negotiate working conditions; it caps court-
awarded redundancy payouts for unfair dismissals; it simpliﬁes
worker representation in companies; it allows small ﬁrms to by-
pass union agreements; and it makes it easier to hire people just
for speciﬁc projects. Employers are to be trusted to reach deals
with employees. Small ﬁrms are to be freed of many constraints.
There is no new project to subsidise jobs, and existing such
schemes—“the least eﬃcient of all employment policies”, said Ms
Pénicaud—will be shrunk. Contained in ﬁve “ordinances”, under
an accelerated procedure already approved by parliament, the re-
form will be written into law next month.
It is a radical turnaround, not just because of the technical
changes to labour law that should help ﬁrms in France to plan, re-
cruit and budget for a less stable world of work. It also represents
a shift in thinking that would have been unimaginable even a
year ago. In the summer of 2016, strikes and angry demonstra-
tions obliged the previous French government to force through a
far more timid labour reform by decree. This time, their disap-
proval of the detail notwithstanding, two of the country’s three
big unions have decided not to join a day of strikes on September
12th. Mr Macron recognises that France cannot stand still while
technology dislocates the jobs market. It is people, rather than
posts, that need protecting. “For 30 years we’ve suﬀered from the
sickness of mass unemployment,” he said on a recent trip to Aus-
tria, where joblessness is 5.4%. “That’s the French problem.” 

Les revenants
If the young French president is chasing the lingering spirit of
Marx from labour-market policy, though, it is not because he
seeks to deliver France into the hands of ghoulish unchecked cap-
italism. A former minister in a Socialist government, Mr Macron
knows that he needs to match a liberalised labour market with a
modernised welfare system, which can better protect people—
rather than jobs—from spells without, or with less, work. This
week, for instance, the government announced plans to bring
self-employed workers into the unemployment-beneﬁt system
for the ﬁrst time. Mr Macron seeks to turn France not into America
or Britain, but a sort of Scandinavia à la française.
It was while in Paris in 1843-1845, under the July monarchy, that
Marx was ﬁrst drawn to revolutionary-socialist thought. His
ghost will haunt the capital again when France’s most powerful,
and communist-linked, union holds its one-day strike. It will be
back on September 23rd during a day of protests organised by the
far left’s Jean-Luc Mélenchon, a defender of the Venezuelan re-
gime and an advocate of a top income-tax rate of 100%. Thanks to
his well-planned talks, Mr Macron may have banished the spec-
tre of communism from labour reform. But he may still need to
face it down on the streets. 7

STRANGE rituals have been taking place behind closed doors in
Paris this summer. While much of Europe basked on the beach,
elaborate rites and unfamiliar incantations could be overheard in
the French capital. Paranormal activity was detected at unusual
hours. In 300 hours of talks, which led to the unveiling last week
of 36 reforms to the country’s notoriously complicated labour
rules, it looked as if President Emmanuel Macron’s government
and union leaders were simply negotiating a technical overhaul
of France’s rigid employment law. In fact, they were exorcising
some of the country’s most troublesome demons. 
For decades, the spirit of Karl Marx and his inheritors has hov-
ered over thinking about French labour reform. In 2000, when
the Socialist government of Lionel Jospin introduced the 35-hour
working week, the underlying idea was to share out existing
work and create more jobs. Martine Aubry, the labour minister at
the time, described the shorter week as a “project of solidarity to-
wards the unemployed”. By working less, the benevolent French
were to hand on their remaining tasks to the jobless, in line with
Trotsky’s call for “all the work on hand” to “be divided among all
existing workers”. 
Over the years, solid worker protection for the French has
been entrenched by European labour law. Yet France’s 3,448-page
door-stopping labour code adds a wedge of other rights, which
often seem inspired by the need to constrain bosses from their
urge to exploit their workers. Such distrust has persuaded policy-
makers to favour public spending as a tool to combat unemploy-
ment. Directly subsidised jobs are preferred to a proper attempt
to ease the rules that deter ﬁrms from creating such posts them-
selves. France operates a menagerie of schemes for subsidising
jobs. The names come and go, as governments of the left and
right rotate in and out of power: contrats jeunes, contrats d’avenir,
contrats aidés, contrats de génération. Yet, despite the public subsi-
dy, France’s unemployment rate has remained unacceptably
high. At 9.5%, it is more than twice that in Germany, and has not
dipped below 7% since 1980. The jobless rate for the under-25s is
over 20%. 
Bold is the French politician who defends the idea that ﬁrms
might be more willing to hire more staﬀ if redundancy rules were
less punitive. “Who could imagine that making redundancies

Br itain

The Economist September 9th 2017 47

Also in this section
48 Squeezing oil out of the North Sea
49 Bagehot: The Br itish spy novel

The economy

Keeping calm and carrying on

Against expectations, business investment has held up well since the Brexit vote.
Can it last?
IT WAS sure to slump. Following the
Brexit referendum of June 2016, many
economists expected that shrinking invest-
ment would push the economy into reces-
sion. Some saw investment falling by near-
ly a tenth in 2017, similar to when the
ﬁnancial crisis hit in 2008-09. Foreign di-
rect investment (FDI) was also expected to
dry up, especially after Theresa May, the
new prime minister, promised a “hard
Brexit”, leaving the EU’s single market.
Try telling that to David King of Makar
Technologies, a small electronics manufac-
turer near Inverness. The ﬁrm has just one
site but in the next 12 months will open
new ones in Edinburgh, near Exeter and
near Cambridge. It plans to employ 40 peo-
ple, up from 12 today. Asked how Brexit af-
fects his expansion plans, Mr King’s re-
sponse is simple: “It doesn’t.”
His is not the only company pressing on
with its investments. In July Amazon, the
online-retailing behemoth, announced
that it would take all 15 storeys of the Princi-
pal Place building in Shoreditch as it hires
more people to work in research and de-
velopment. On September 5th Aveva, a
software group based in Cambridge, un-
veiled a merger with the software arm of
France’s Schneider Electric. Across the
economy in the past year, both business in-
vestment and FDI have held up. Given that
Remainers and Leavers alike agree that the
prospect of Brexit has left Britain in a state

of considerable uncertainty, why do ﬁrms
of all shapes and sizes seem so chipper?
Each year in Britain the private sector
invests about four times as much as the
government, in everything from new
buildings to computers. Investment is at
the root of improvements in productivity
and, hence, pay-packets. FDI can be espe-
cially useful. Research suggests that when
American multinationals take over British
ﬁrms they bring better technology and
management, lifting productivity by as
much as 10%. Foreign-owned companies
also appear to spend more on R&D than
comparable British ones.
Since the ﬁnancial crisis, business in-
vestment in Britain has been lacklustre. In
the decade before the crisis it was worth on
average 10.7% of GDP; that has since fallen
to 9.3%. FDI has been up and down.
By these underwhelming standards,
the period since the referendum hardly
seems like a disaster. In the second quarter
of this year, real-terms business invest-
ment was about as high as it was in the
same period last year, before the vote. It
may be the case, as Peter Mandelson, a La-
bour peer, argues, that Britain is missing
out on additional investment that would
have been made in the event of a Remain
vote. That is unknowable. Yet it is hard to
ﬁnd much evidence to support the idea. Ex-
clude investment in the extraction of raw
materials, which has collapsed because of

For daily analysis and debate on Br itain, visit
Economist.com/br itain

low oil prices (see next story), and business
investment rose by 1.5% last year. 
It is a similar story with FDI. Statistics
from Dealogic, a data provider, suggest that
foreign mergers and acquisitions of British
ﬁrms this year represent a tenth of the glo-
bal total, which is in line with the long-
term average. Inward FDI hit an all-time
high in the fourth quarter of 2016. Some
fear that foreign moneymen are using ster-
ling’s depreciation as an opportunity to as-
set-strip British ﬁrms. Yet there is not much
sign of this. Oxford Intelligence, a consul-
tancy, tracks FDI into oﬃces, factories, R&D
facilities and the like. In 2016 the number of
projects rose slightly on the year before.

Steady as she goes
Leavers might claim that
the relative
strength of investment shows enthusiasm
for Brexit among businesspeople. This is
hard to square with the surveys before the
referendum showing that a majority of
British companies of all sizes, as well as vir-
tually all big foreign ones, backed Remain.
A recent attempt by the government to get
leading British ﬁrms to sign a letter backing
its Brexit strategy was rebuﬀed.
Other factors are at play. Wear and tear
means that some investment is due each
year. If a builder’s van breaks down it
needs replacing, Brexit or no. The rate of re-
placement may have increased as more in-
vestment goes into computers and soft-
ware, says Jonathan Haskel of Imperial
College London, because this sort of capi-
tal needs updating frequently. 
Some projects captured by oﬃcial sta-
tistics reﬂect decisions taken long before
the referendum. Tottenham Hotspur’s gi-
gantic new football stadium, which is due
to open next year, represents an invest-
ment of hundreds of millions of pounds
that received planning permission in 2011.

1

48 Br itain

2

The external conditions facing ﬁrms
have also encouraged investment. Borrow-
ing is dead cheap. For the ﬁrst time since
the crisis a cyclical upswing in the global
economy is under way. Investment inten-
tions have picked up across the world, as
Mark Carney, the governor of the Bank of
England, pointed out in a recent speech.
FDI projects have risen across Europe too.
Nonetheless, with Britain’s future rela-
tionship with the EU so unclear, it remains
puzzling that more ﬁrms have not adopted
a wait-and-see approach. Since the referen-
dum, one closely watched measure of eco-
nomic uncertainty, constructed through
analysis of newspaper articles, has been
well above its post-crisis average. 
Yet that measure of uncertainty is un-
correlated with capital investment, accord-
ing to research by Kristin Forbes, formerly
of the Bank of England. Manufacturers in
Inverness may not be animated by the
same issues as journalists in London. Nine
out of ten small and medium-sized ﬁrms
do not export, so they may not much care
whether Britain reaches a trade deal with
the EU, or replaces the 50 or so others that it
will lose on leaving. Bosses have more ur-
gent things to do than to keep up with the
latest twists in the Brussels soap-opera.
Perhaps more surprisingly, it is not just
small ﬁrms that seem unswayed by Brexit.
According to our analysis, eight out of ten
company ﬁlings made by FTSE 100 ﬁrms
this year do not even mention Brexit (or re-
lated phrases such as “single market”).
“There is a huge diﬀerence between the po-
litical thinking about Brexit as opposed to
what takes place in the more practical
world of business,” says Karina Luper of
Oxford Intelligence.
Foreign investors also seem more inter-
ested in other things. Chandru Iyer works
for Kingston Smith, a ﬁrm which has been
helping Indian companies set up shop in
Britain since the 1980s. He says that Indian
investors like Britain’s corporation-tax rate,
which at 19% is the lowest in the G7. For
many foreign investors, Britain is still seen
as a safe-ish haven. America has a volatile
president, Hong Kong’s moneymen are
concerned about Chinese meddling and
there is turmoil in the Middle East.
The question is how long ﬁrms will re-
main on autopilot. Even those that are not
changing their behaviour because of the
prospect of Brexit will be aﬀected by its re-
ality in 18 months. The adoption of a re-
strictive post-Brexit immigration policy, of
the sort outlined this week in a leaked doc-
ument from the Home Oﬃce, or the failure
to reach any kind of trade deal with the EU,
would deprive companies of the people
and products they rely on. The resulting
economic crunch would aﬀect all ﬁrms, in-
cluding those that feel insulated from the
EU. The slump may merely have been de-
ferred. For now, though, British business
marches cheerfully into the unknown. 7

North Sea oil

Wreck and roll

A B E R D E E N

An ageing icon of the oil industry gets a
welcome shot of fresh blood
NOT for nothing is Aberdeen known as
the Granite City. Its oil industry is in
the throes of three crises, one cyclical, one
structural, and one potentially existential.
Yet on September 5th, when the industry’s
stalwarts gathered for a biennial confer-
ence on the future of North Sea oil, they put
on a brave face. “I’d be a bit wary of piping
the last lament,” says Robin Watson, boss
of Wood Group, a big Aberdeen-based oil-
services ﬁrm.
The ﬁrst, cyclical crisis has been caused
by the oil-price crash that started in 2014.
Costs for exploration and production that
had ballooned when oil was above $100 a

Total

Dana

BP

Premier Oil

She t land
I s land s

NORWA Y

Brent
oil f ield
Decipher
EnQuest

Apache
TAQA

StatOil
BP
Apache
Maersk
Ithaca
Maersk

StatOil

EnQuest

Repsol
Sinopec

Aberdeen

S CO T LAND

Premier Oil

N o r t h S e a

Energie

ENG LAND

EOG

200 km

Oil fields Labelled by operating company
Source: OGA
Started production 2016-17
Not yet in production

barrel became millstones. Proﬁts plunged,
forcing ﬁrms to slash costs. Jobs in Britain’s
maritime oil-and-gas industry have fallen
from 460,000 in 2014 to about 300,000.
The number of some types of exploration
project has fallen to its lowest since 1971.
Tax revenues from North Sea oil, which
since the 1970s add up to £330bn ($430bn)
in today’s prices, have all but dried up.
The structural crisis is one of old age. In
its ﬁfth decade, the North Sea basin is now
termed “ultra mature” by Wood Macken-
zie, an energy consultancy. Others less po-
litely liken it to a maritime used-car lot,
with second-hand rigs changing hands at
low prices and old bangers being decom-
missioned or turned into scrap. Simon

Correction: Last week’s stor y on foreign students, “A
costly mistake”, contained a mistake of its own. We said
that oﬃcial estimates had put the number of students
illegally overstaying their visas each year at more than
90,000. In fact this referred to the gap between the
number enter ing the countr y and those leaving. Sorr y.

The Economist September 9th 2017

Flowers of Wood Mackenzie says that by
2022 the money spent on decommission-
ing will exceed investment in new sources
of growth. In May Royal Dutch Shell re-
moved the 24,200-tonne topside of the ﬁrst
platform to go in the Brent ﬁeld, which was
discovered in 1971. Oﬃcial estimates say
the North Sea’s total decommissioning bill
may reach £60bn, for which taxpayers are
on the hook for about £24bn. 
The third, potentially existential crisis
relates to the future of oil and gas itself. If
oil demand peaks, as some predict it will
by 2030, North Sea oil would be unlikely to
survive an era of permanently low prices.
Unit operating costs to extract oil have
halved since 2014, but are still much higher
than in parts of the Middle East, the Gulf of
Mexico, Africa and even Norway. Though
oil and gas will remain vital sources of en-
ergy for decades, a reminder of the rise of
alternative sources is the proliferation of
North Sea wind farms, including one at the
nearby Trump International Golf Links,
which has irked its owner.
Yet eﬃciency improvements that are
squeezing more oil out of the ground and a
ﬂurry of recent deals indicate that there is
still hope for the industry, even with oil
near $50 a barrel. For the past three years
British oil production has bucked a trend,
started in 2000, of falling output. A string
of new ﬁelds commissioned during the
boom years until 2014 are coming on
stream (see map). 
New money is also ﬂowing in. Shell’s
sale, announced in January, of $3bn of
North Sea assets to Chrysaor, a ﬁrm backed
by American private-equity investors, may
mark a turning point in which smaller
ﬁrms take over assets from bigger produc-
ers, to work them more intensely. Chrysaor
aims to use modern techniques to increase
oil recovery from existing wells, as well as
preserving critical pipeline hubs to avoid
stranding potentially productive wells.
Siccar Point, another ﬁrm backed by
American private-equity money, is promis-
ing to explore and produce oil from the
North Sea assets it recently acquired. Hur-
ricane Energy, a small exploration com-
pany, claims to have made a surprisingly
big discovery west of the Shetland islands,
where Shell and BP are also increasing
their production.
Deals worth some £4.5bn in the ﬁrst
half of 2017 have helped revive spirits in
Aberdeen, as has £2.3bn of government
support and a regulator, the Oil and Gas
Authority, that has powers to sanction
those sitting idly on productive assets. But
they are not enough. On September 6th Oil
and Gas UK, an industry body, said that un-
less more investment materialised, oil and
gas production could fall sharply again
after 2019. Alex Kemp of the University of
Aberdeen says that if prices remain around
$50 a barrel, the long-term outlook for
North Sea oil is pretty bleak. 7

The Economist September 9th 2017 

Bagehot

Spies like us

To understand Britain, read its spy novels

Br itain 49

Bagehot argued (approvingly) that Britain weaves duplicity into
its statecraft. The constitution rests on a distinction between an
“eﬃcient” branch which governs behind the scenes, and a “digni-
ﬁed” branch which puts on a show for the people.
The British habitually wear masks to conceal their true selves.
They put on diﬀerent costumes for diﬀerent roles in Bagehot’s
theatre of state, and keep stiﬀ upper lips to conceal their emo-
tions. Mr le Carré (whose real name is David Cornwell) learned to
put on a brave face at school because he was so embarrassed by
his father, who was a professional conﬁdence trickster. Greene
learned the spymaster’s art when, as a pupil at Berkhamsted
School, he acted as an informer for his father, the headmaster.
The British establishment is not only a perfect machine for
producing secrets and lies. It also produces the mavericks and
misﬁts who thrive in the secret world. Establishment types seem
to come in two varieties: smooth conformists who do everything
by the rules, and mavericks who break every rule but are never-
theless tolerated because they are members of the club. The ﬁrst
type is sent into the Foreign Oﬃce and the second into MI6. The
best spy novels are like distorting mirrors in fairgrounds: by exag-
gerating this or that feature of Establishment Man, they allow the
reader to understand the ideal form.
The other great theme in British spy novels is geopolitical de-
cline. How can people who were “trained to Empire, trained to
rule the waves”, as one of Mr le Carré’s characters puts it, bear to
live in a world in which the waves are ruled by other powers and
statecraft is reduced to providing fuel for the welfare state? Flem-
ing’s novels are full of laments about Britain’s “crumbling em-
pire” and its dependency-producing state. “You have not only lost
a great empire,” Tiger Tanaka, a Japanese spy, tells Bond, “you
have seemed almost anxious to throw it away with both hands.”
Mr le Carré once described Britain as a country where “failed so-
cialism is being replaced by failed capitalism”. The Circus, as he
called the secret service’s headquarters, is a physical manifesta-
tion of decline: cramped, shoddy, reeking of rising damp, just one
hasty repair away from collapse.

Nobody does it better
Why remain loyal to a country that has made such a mess of
things and to an establishment soaked in hypocrisy? Mr le
Carré’s traitors (like the Cambridge spies who inspired them) be-
tray their country not for money but because they have trans-
ferred their patriotism to the Soviet Union. But what makes Brit-
ain’s best spy novels so good is that they toy with disillusionment
only to reject it. For all its faults, they say, Britain is the best of a bad
lot. Bond is so besotted with his country that he boasts that “Brit-
ish food is the best in the world”. For all his professed European-
ness in the new novel, Smiley is the model of a British gentleman.
And spying provides Britain with a way of reclaiming its great-
ness, by excelling in the most sophisticated form of foreign policy.
The Americans have the money and the bluster, but the British
have the brains to spend it wisely and restrain the Americans
from going over the top. Felix Leiter, Bond’s opposite number in
the CIA, admits that Bond is playing “in a bigger league” than he
is. Smiley is more subtle than his “cousins” in America. The secret
at the heart of the British spy novel is that Britain is much better
than it seems. The writers agonise over decline and hypocrisy,
only to conclude that the British are cleverer and more civilised
than anybody else. A comforting illusion wrapped in a tale of dis-
illusionment: you can’t get more British than that. 7

FEW countries have dominated any industry as Britain has
dominated the industry of producing ﬁctional spies. Britain in-
vented the spy novel with Rudyard Kipling’s dissection of the
Great Game in “Kim” and John Buchan’s adventure stories. It con-
solidated its lead with Somerset Maugham’s Ashenden stories
and Graham Greene’s invention of “Greeneland”. It then pro-
duced the world’s two most famous spooks: James Bond, the
dashing womaniser, and George Smiley, the cerebral cuckold,
who reappears this week in a new book (see page 71).
What accounts for this success? One reason is the revolving
door between the secret establishment and the literary establish-
ment. Some of the lions of British literature worked as spies.
Maugham was sent to Switzerland to spy for Britain under cover
of pursuing his career as a writer. Greene worked for the intelli-
gence services. Both Ian Fleming, the creator of Bond, and John le
Carré, the creator of Smiley, earned their living as spies. Dame
Stella Rimington, head of MI5 in 1992-96, has taken to writing spy
novels in retirement. It is as if the secret services are not so much
arms of the state as creative-writing schools.
Another reason is that British reality has often been stranger
than ﬁction. The story of the “Cambridge spies”—Kim Philby, An-
thony Blunt, Guy Burgess and the rest—is as far-fetched as it gets.
One Soviet mole at the top of MI6 (Philby, who also worked for
The Economist in Beirut); another even looking after the queen’s
pictures (Blunt); a cover-up; a dash to the safety of the Soviet Un-
ion; larger-than-life characters such as the compulsively promis-
cuous and permanently sozzled Burgess.
There is also a more profound reason for Britain’s success. The
spy novel is the quintessential British ﬁctional form in the same
way that the Western is quintessentially American. Britain’s best
spy novelists are so good precisely because they use the genre to
explore what it is that makes Britain British: the obsession with
secrecy, the nature of the establishment, the agonies of imperial
decline and the complicated tug of patriotism.
Britain is honeycombed with secretive institutions, particular-
ly public schools and Oxbridge colleges, which have their own
private languages. At Eton, for example, where Fleming was edu-
cated and Mr le Carré taught for a while, boys dress in tailcoats
and call their teachers “beaks” and their terms “halves”. Walter

JAPAN 
SUMM IT

A new 
dawn?

(cid:31)(cid:30)%

o(cid:29) 

the standard 
rate
with code 
TE(cid:29)(cid:29)(cid:28)(cid:27)

Register today and save

October 26th 
2017

To k yo

YURIKO KOIKE 
Governor
Tokyo Metropolitan 
Government

KOICHIRO YOSHIDA
Founder and 
chief executive o(cid:30)  cer
Crowdworks 

KIMIE IWATA 
President, Japan Institute 
for Women's Empowerment 
& Diversity Management 
and external director 
Japan Airlines

SACHIN SHAH 
Executive vice-president 
MetLife and 
chairman, president and 
chief executive o(cid:30)  cer 
MetLife Insurance K .K

Is achieving work-life balance in Japan a fantasy?
From the outside, Japan does not seem like a good place to 
work. Too often, companies are in the news for the wrong 
reasons. But things may be set to change. 
Meet with business leaders at Japan Summit 2017 on 
October 26th in Tokyo to discuss how Japan's corporate chiefs 
are rethinking company cultures to boost productivity and 
improve sta(cid:31)  well-being . 

Contact us:

+852 2585 3312

asiaevents@economist.com

japan.economist .com

@EconomistEvents
#EconJapan

Plat inum sponsor

Go ld sponsor 

S i lver sponsors 

International

The Economist September 9th 2017 51

Technology and ﬁnancial inclusion

Underserved and overlooked

In rich countries, just as in developing ones, digital technology could make
ﬁnancial struggles easier to manage. Its potential has scarcely been tapped
BETWEEN 2011 and 2014, according to the
even bigger share do now. Clever technol-
World Bank, the number of people in
ogy is therefore unnecessary for ﬁnancial
the world with a bank account, either di-
inclusion, at least in this narrow sense. Yet
rectly or through a mobile-money pro-
an account only gets you so far. “Inclusion
vider, grew by no fewer than 700m. The
doesn’t denote engagement,” says David
global ranks of “unbanked” adults thinned
Brear of 11:FS, a bank-technology consul-
from 2.5bn, 49% of the total, to 2bn, just
tancy. “Just because you have a bank ac-
38%. Data being collected this year are like-
count, it doesn’t mean you know what an
ly to show further progress, with more peo-
APR [annualised percentage rate] is.”
ple who used to rely on cash and informal,
Financial services can still be forbid-
often expensive, means of saving, borrow-
dingly expensive, complicated or hard to
ing and paying for goods and services now
obtain, especially for people on low or
connected to formal ﬁnancial systems.
variable incomes, those with patchy credit
This rapid advance is far from complete:
records, immigrants and refugees. Digital
2bn is still a big number. Plenty of transac-
technology can help. Just as it has cut the
tions that could take place more safely and
cost of serving the unbanked in emerging
eﬃciently by electronic means are still con-
markets, it has made marginalised groups
ducted in cash. Nonetheless, progress has
in developed countries cheaper to serve.
been remarkable. It is largely the product
And just as telecom and internet giants,
of a technological revolution—the harness-
rather than banks, have led the way in the
ing of digital technology, in particular mo-
poor world, ﬁnancial-technology (“ﬁn-
bile phones, to provide ﬁnancial services
tech”) startups are in the vanguard in the
in developing countries. The most celebrat-
rich one.
ed example is M-PESA, a mobile-money
It is not only the poor who ﬁnd money
service used by 27m Kenyans. Although
hard to manage or bureaucracy hard to
only 2% of people worldwide had a
crack. “In developed countries the chal-
mobile-money account in 2014, in sub-
lenge is not so much inclusion as ﬁnancial
Saharan Africa 12% did, half of whom were
health,” says Tilman Ehrbeck of Omidyar
not customers of conventional ﬁnancial
Network, a philanthropic group that in-
institutions.
vests in startups in both rich and emerging
In rich OECD countries, 90% of adults
economies. According to the Centre for Fi-
already had a bank account in 2011. An
nancial Services Innovation (CFSI), a

think-tank in Chicago, 35% of American
households that struggle ﬁnancially make
more than $60,000 a year. Immigrants to
Britain, for example, even if they have
come from elsewhere in the European Un-
ion and have a job, complain that setting
up a bank account can take months. Banks
typically demand proofs of residence, such
as utility or local-tax bills, which new arriv-
als do not have.
The CFSI estimates that 121m American
adults have either credit scores below 600
on credit agencies’ standard scale or no
score at all because agencies have little in-
formation about them. For such people
loans are pricey or inaccessible. Fully 91m
have incomes too low, and 54m have in-
comes too volatile, to use mainstream ﬁ-
nancial products eﬀectively. The Federal
Deposit Insurance Corporation, a bank
regulator, reckons that 16m still have no
bank account at all, although the number is
declining fast, and another 51m are “under-
banked”—meaning that they go outside the
banking system to meet their ﬁnancial
needs, turning to services such as cheque-
cashing or payday loans.

He that hath not
Americans in these overlapping categories
spent $141bn on fees and interest in 2015,
says the CFSI: $55bn or so went on loans
lasting more than two years, including
subprime car ﬁnance. Subprime credit
cards are another big category, and grow-
ing fast. Poorer people are likelier than the
better-oﬀ to use cash. They also spend
$5bn a year on tax advisers, who prepare
their returns early and advance them mon-
ey in anticipation of a rebate. 
Banks and ﬁntech startups backed by
venture capitalists are spending oodles on 

1

ing loans to people whose only failing was
to have thin credit records (his wife had
been among them). Its machine-learning
software draws on wider, messier sources
of information—eg, whether people pro-
vide the same mobile-phone number in
diﬀerent credit applications, or whether
they are licensed professionals. A credit-
card issuer using it has cut annual losses by
a nine-ﬁgure sum. RentBureau, a company
acquired in 2010 by Experian, a credit-scor-
ing agency, spotted that databases on ten-
ants included only adverse information,
such as late payments. Simply noting that
rent was paid on time was a straightfor-
ward way of thickening a thin credit ﬁle.
Immigrants can ﬁnd it hard to get a
bank account at all, let alone credit. Mon-
ese, a startup in London, has built a busi-
ness largely on the frustration of arrivals in
Britain from other EU countries. It is not
technically a bank but an “electronic mon-
ey institution” which places its customers’
cash with licensed banks. In eﬀect, how-
ever, it oﬀers a standard online bank ac-
count, with a debit card, contactless pay-
ments and so forth, for a monthly fee, as
well as remittances in ten currencies.
Whereas banks insist that new custom-
ers present documents physically, Monese
asks them to install its app on their smart-
phones, video themselves and photo-
graph their passport or identity card. It
checks identities and issues account details
within 90 seconds or so. According to Nor-
ris Koppel, the ﬁrm’s chief executive, Mo-
nese’s software-based veriﬁcation proce-
dures are more accurate than those of
banks, which rely on visual checks of pass-
ports and utility bills by branch staﬀ. The
two-year-old company has nearly 100,000
active account-holders, mostly other Euro-
peans in Britain. Recently it opened up
across the euro area too.
If Europeans free to roam across the sin-
gle market ﬁnd banking systems hard to

52 International

2 bringing ﬁnance into the digital age. Until a
couple of years ago, says Mr Brear, banks
concentrated on cutting costs and simplify-
ing processes. Their digital services are get-
ting slicker, but are aimed chieﬂy at the
broad mass of existing customers rather
than poorer new ones. “If you need a lot of
help, digital is leaving you behind,” Mr
Brear says. (He thinks rich clients, who
want personalised help for diﬀerent rea-
sons, are also missing out.)
Yet digital technology is cutting the cost
of serving just about everyone. Amir Hem-
mat of SABEResPODER (“knowledge is
power”) in Los Angeles, which gives His-
panics in America information on educa-
tion and health care as well as ﬁnance, says
that a lack of data is a “classic excuse” for
denying aﬀordable ﬁnance to the less well-
oﬀ. “I don’t buy that, in this day and age.”
SABEResPODER generates “an enor-
mous amount of data around a hard-to-
reach population”, which it uses to ﬁnance
its operations. Its 930,000 members are
paid to complete smartphone surveys. It
sells the results (with their permission) to
market researchers for companies hoping
to sell more to Hispanics. Clients have in-
cluded Ford, MoneyGram, Nielsen, Sprint
and Wells Fargo. 

Computer says yes
Plenty of companies are working away.
The CFSI’s Financial Solutions Lab, backed
by JPMorgan Chase, America’s biggest
bank, incubates eight to ten startups a year.
Jennifer Tescher, the CFSI’s chief executive,
says it runs the rule over 350 hopefuls an-
nually. One graduate, Propel, helps recipi-
ents of food stamps, which are received via
government-issued debit cards, to manage
their beneﬁts. According to Propel, 70% of
cardholders have smartphones, but most
check their balances by calling a hotline or
(more precariously) by saving grocery re-
ceipts. The company’s app shows their bal-
ance, lists their transactions and tells them
which local shops accept stamps. It recent-
ly raised $4m from investors including
Omidyar, the CFSI and Andreessen Horo-
witz, a Silicon Valley venture-capital ﬁrm.
Digital technology has made it easier to
collect and sift data—and hence to ﬁnd
creditworthy people among those with
“thin” conventional credit ﬁles, who might
otherwise be denied loans. “There are a lot
of 680s among those 540s,” says Arjan
Schütte of Core Innovation Capital, a ven-
ture-capital fund, referring to credit scores.
At the same time, algorithms, like human
risk-oﬃcers, have to avoid lending to those
who cannot aﬀord to borrow. Reckless
American mortgage lending not only fed
the boom that preceded the ﬁnancial crisis
of 2007-08, but also left borrowers ruined.
Douglas Merrill, a former chief infor-
mation oﬃcer of Google, was prompted to
start his ﬁrm, ZestFinance, by a conviction
that conventional credit scoring was deny-

The Economist September 9th 2017

unlock, asylum-seekers and refugees face
an even more daunting task. They have lit-
tle money and may lack documents that
banks, wary of know-your-customer and
anti-money-laundering rules, will accept.
At the same time, easier access to banking
should help refugees and hosts alike. “To-
day’s refugee is tomorrow’s citizen,” says
Balazs Nemethi of Taqanu, a startup.
One promising idea is to apply looser
identity rules to refugees, in exchange for
limited banking facilities—for example,
with caps on the amount they can have in
an account or on transfers of money. BaFin,
Germany’s banking regulator, relaxed the
terms in 2015, reasoning that it was easier to
keep an eye on formal ﬁnancial services
than on informal ones. Taqanu is working
on ways to establish identity using peo-
ple’s digital footprints, such as the location
of their mobile phones or their use of so-
cial media, to complement often-patchy
formal documentation. 
MONI, a Finnish startup, has already
provided services to refugees. It oﬀers
blockchain-based accounts
(launched
across Europe this week) which, like those
of Monese, can be set up in seconds. They
can be topped up from a normal bank ac-
count or a credit card. Their facility for in-
stant payments and transfers is handy for
lending or giving money to friends and rel-
atives on a tight budget, as well as for set-
tling bills. In 2015 the Finnish government
asked MONI to supply accounts and debit
cards to refugees, to whom it gives a
monthly allowance and a temporary iden-
tiﬁcation card, in a pilot programme.
Antti Pennanen, MONI’s boss, says that
around 4,000 refugees in Finland still have
active accounts. Their usage has grown
now that many more refugees have jobs,
can pay bills and so forth. Relatives can
send money without needing to entrust
cash to the post. MONI is working on pro-
viding automated help in dozens of lan-
guages through artiﬁcial intelligence. The
scheme is due to be extended to refugees
elsewhere in Europe this month.
Much more could be done, and not just
for new arrivals. Ms Tescher laments the
slow pace of bank transfers within the Un-
ited States. Real-time payments would
speed up cash ﬂows, encourage electronic
payments and squeeze cheque-cashers
and payday lenders. Mr Schütte says that
American laws restricting the types of in-
formation used to assess creditworthiness
are too tight for the digital age. He also
thinks that the Community Reinvestment
Act of 1977, intended to thwart discrimina-
tion against African-Americans, is out of
date. It forces banks to maintain branch
networks in an era when deposits and
branches are increasingly poorly matched.
Steven Mnuchin, the treasury secretary, is
planning an overhaul. Shifting the focus
from bricks and mortar to online services
would be a good place to start. 7

Business

The Economist September 9th 2017 53

Also in this section
54 Lessons from ﬁdget spinners
55 UTC takes over Rockwell
55 Nukes and electr icity
56 India and textiles
56 Loyalty schemes
57 Mainland microbrews 
57 Infrastructure for electr ic cars
Schumpeter is away

For daily coverage of business, visit
Economist.com/business-ﬁnance 

“swipe” their faces on smartphones to au-
thorise payments. On September 12th Ap-
ple is expected to unveil a new version of
its iPhone, with technology that can reli-
ably identify the owner’s face and then un-
lock the device, even in the dark. That will
come only a few weeks after Samsung pre-
sented a new Galaxy Note with a similar
but less sophisticated feature.
It makes sense to separate facial-recog-
nition technology into two categories: the
underlying capability and the applications
that make use of it. Megvii’s Face++ belongs
in the ﬁrst category, as do similar oﬀerings
from SenseTime, another Chinese startup,
NTechLab, a Russian ﬁrm, as well as Ama-
zon, IBM and Microsoft. All provide face
recognition as a cloud-computing service.
Megvii’s customers can upload a batch of
photos and names, and use them to train
algorithms, which then can recognise
those particular people. Firms can also in-
tegrate the recognition service into their
own oﬀerings, for instance to control ac-
cess to online accounts.
Megvii’s and SenseTime’s services are
largely founded on good data. They have
access to the Chinese government’s image
database of 700m citizens, who are each
given a photo ID by the age of 16. Chinese
government agencies are also valuable
customers—more and more of the coun-
try’s hundreds of millions of surveillance
cameras will soon recognise faces. In
Shenzhen facial recognition is used to
identify jaywalkers; names and pictures go
up on a screen. In Beijing the municipality
has started using the technology to catch
thieves of toilet paper in public restrooms
(its system also prevents people from tak-
ing more than 60 centimetres of paper
within a nine-minute period). 
Commercial applications, often pow-
ered by one of the cloud-computing ser-
vices, are spreading even faster. On Sep-

1

Visual computing

The facial-industrial complex

B E I J I N G A N D S A N F R A N C I S C O

Ever better and cheaper, face-recognition technology is spreading 
TOURING the headquarters of Megvii
optimistic estimates put it at a few billion
in Beijing is like visiting Big Brother’s
dollars—the technology has started to per-
engine room. A video camera in the ﬁrm’s
meate the wider business landscape. The
lobby recognises visitors in the blink of an
main reason is that the accuracy of facial
eye. Other such devices are deployed
recognition is rapidly improving, putting it
around the oﬃce. Some of the images they
on the same trajectory as speech recogni-
capture are shown on a wall of video
tion, which really took oﬀ when accuracy
called “Skynet”, after the artiﬁcial-intelli-
improved by a ﬁnal few percentage points,
gence (AI) system in the “Terminator”
to almost 100%. “Most people underesti-
ﬁlms. One feed shows a group of employ-
mate the diﬀerence between 95% and 99%
ees waiting in front of an elevator with a
accuracy—99% is a game-changer,” An-
drew Ng, a noted AI researcher, has said
white frame around every face and the
name of each person next to it. Quizzed on
about speech recognition.
the Orwellian overtones of the set-up, Yin
What’s more, the smartphone will do
Qi, the startup’s chief executive, simply re-
for face recognition what smart speakers,
marks that “this helps catch bad guys.”
such as the Amazon Echo, have done for
Even if Mr Yin wanted to ponder the im-
speech recognition: make it acceptable to
plications of the technology, he would not
consumers. Millions of Chinese already
have the time. Megvii is busy building
what he describes as a “brain” for visual
computing. The ﬁrm has come a long way
since its founding in 2011 (its name stands
for “mega vision”). More than 300,000
companies and individuals around the
world use its face-recognition technology,
which is called Face++, making it one of the
biggest such services. In December Megvii
raised $100m, giving it a valuation of near-
ly $2bn and turning it into the world’s ﬁrst
billion-dollar startup from might be called
the “facial-industrial complex”. 
Providers in this ﬁeld sell hardware and
software tools to recognise faces and then
connect those faces to other useful data. Al-
though the market is fairly small—the most

Facial biometr ics global revenue by region, $m

Middle East
and Afr ica
Latin Amer ica

Halt, who goes there?

Europe
Nor th Amer ica

600

400

200

0

2015 16 17 18 19 20

Source: Tractica

FO R E C A S T

Asia Pacif ic

54 Business

2 tember 1st Ant Financial, a subsidiary of
Alibaba, deployed its “Smile to Pay” sys-
tem for the ﬁrst time in a physical store: cus-
tomers at a healthier version of a KFC res-
taurant, called KPRO, in Hangzhou, can
settle their bill by looking at a screen (see
picture on previous page). Xiaomai, a
chain of convenience stores, has said it will
use facial scans when people enter its
stores in order to study their behaviour.
Several Chinese banks now let users iden-
tify themselves at ATMs with their faces. 
The West is further behind. Some in-
dustries have long used a basic kind of face
recognition, including casinos wishing to
turn away notorious gamblers. But it is
mainly big online companies that make
(cautious) use of the technology. Facebook
has gone furthest by having its members
tag friends on photos so the ﬁrm’s algo-
rithms can recognise them on other pic-
tures. Google employs the technology in
order to group pictures that users have
uploaded to its photo service. Amazon’s
new home speaker, Echo Look, also has a
camera, which could presumably be made
to recognise faces.
Other ﬁrms are testing the waters. Jet-
Blue and other American airlines have tak-
en initial steps to match passengers’ faces
to passport photos, aiming to eliminate
boarding passes. Lloyds Bank is not the
only Western bank planning to copy Chi-
nese ones and allow customers to use their
faces to log into accounts. Uber, a ride-hail-
ing ﬁrm, has a system requiring drivers in
India to take a selﬁe before starting a shift.
This should cut down on unregistered driv-
ers impersonating registered ones. Nvidia,
a chipmaker, has plans for facial recogni-
tion in its new Californian headquarters.
There is potential for products that lift
sales, too. Video cameras could, for in-
stance, recognise loyal customers and VIPs
who deserve special treatment. They
could detect dissatisfaction on shoppers’
faces and dispatch staﬀ to intervene. Wal-
mart, the world’s largest retailer, is said to
be working on a facial-recognition system
to improve customer service. 
Unsurprisingly, perhaps, the spread of
these services has already prompted ef-
forts to thwart them. An Israeli startup,
D-ID, which stands for “de-identiﬁcation”,
has developed software that slightly alters
photos so that algorithms cannot recog-
nise them. This allows people to share pic-
tures of their faces without having to wor-
ry that they will be used to identify them.
Others have suggest low-tech defences
against sophisticated surveillance sys-
tems, such as glasses with hallucinogenic
patterns on the frame of the specs, or sim-
ply wearing masks or make-up.
Yet it is unlikely that such “adversarial
attacks”, in the lingo, will keep face recog-
nition from being widely used. Mr Yin of
Megvii expects the technology to become
a commodity. This is why he has already

set his sights higher. He is directing the
ﬁrm’s computer-vision brain towards even
more complex tasks, such as interpreting
human behaviour and recognising objects.
In the long run Mr Yin wants his ﬁrm to
develop into an “algorithm factory” that of-
fers all sorts of building blocks for comput-
er-vision services, which other ﬁrms will
be able to combine and recombine in order
to come up with ever more sophisticated
oﬀerings. Whether Megvii lives up to this
ambition or not, the technologies it ped-
dles will only spread. 7

Toys

Fidget revolution

Sales might have peaked, but ﬁdget
spinners have changed the toy market
YOU can spin them on your nose, chin,
ﬁnger or tongue. Some include LED
lights; others resemble a ship’s wheel, or
even a skull and crossbones. The ﬁdget
spinner has three paddle-shaped blades at-
tached to a central, weighted disc contain-
ing ball bearings. Flick a blade and it
spins—for as long as 12 minutes, if it’s an ad-
vanced model from Japan. Originally de-
signed to help calm children with atten-
tion-deﬁcit hyperactivity disorder or
autism, it swept the world earlier this year
as a toy that everyone could play with. 
Retail sales have undoubtedly slowed
recently, says Mark Austin of ToyWorld, a
trade publication—good news for
the
schools that have banned the toys as too
distracting for pupils. But the spinner has
created a new “ﬁdget” category of play-
things. And the global toy industry has
learned lessons from its surprising success.
The fad started in America in February.
By May, all 20 of the top-selling toys on

The Economist September 9th 2017

Amazon, an online retailer, were either ﬁd-
get spinners or ﬁdget cubes, a close rela-
tion. There have been many such crazes—
who can forget the great loom-band mania
of 2014?—but none that spread as fast. Fré-
dérique Tutt, an analyst of the global toy
market for NPD, a data company, says the
spinner took just three weeks to cross the
Atlantic and go global. No one knows ex-
actly how many have been sold but NPD
estimates that at least 19m were sold in the
12 rich-world countries that it tracks (in-
cluding America and the biggest European
markets) during the ﬁrst six months of this
year. Others put the ﬁgure at over 50m. 
Big toy retailers, the usual arbiters of
what sells, were initially caught ﬂat-footed.
Fidget spinners were a plaything that chil-
dren themselves discovered and shared on
social media, particularly on YouTube and
Instagram. No person or ﬁrm had a patent
on spinners, so with no licensing fees to
pay, anyone could make them. They are
produced in huge quantities in China, of-
ten by ﬁrms that previously manufactured
smartphone accessories. Others were
made using 3D printing. That has been a
boon for small shops, which have been
able to stock these unbranded goods from
wherever they can ﬁnd them. 
Andrew Moulsher, managing director
of Peterkin, a ﬁrm that imports toys into
Britain, calls it a “watershed moment” for
the business. Big retailers usually plan
their inventory as much as 18 months
ahead of peak seasons such as summer or
Christmas; schedules are often tied to toy-
ﬁlled ﬁlms such as the “Star Wars” and
“Cars” franchises. This is where most of
their attention, as well as their marketing
and advertising budgets, goes. So it was
easy for big retailers to miss the eruption of
ﬁdget spinners online. (Subsequently they
reacted as well as they could, says Mr Aus-
tin, ordering spinners in by air freight.) 
Developing and manufacturing a toy
can take even longer than inventory plan-
ning—up to three years. But now there is
pressure to spot new fads and bring pro-
ducts to market far more quickly. After the
ﬁdget spinner, both manufacturers and re-
tailers know they must respond faster to
signals from social media. A Californian
company, MGA, which was founded in
1979, spotted that children were watching
YouTube videos of other youngsters open-
ing presents; to take advantage of this “un-
boxing” trend, it managed to produce the
L.O.L. Surprise! doll, which contains sever-
al layers of gifts, in just nine months. It has
become another best-seller. 
The spinner’s successor may be the
roller, an oblong object weighted at either
end. Mr Moulsher started importing Japa-
nese Mokuru rollers into Britain in July and
has sold about 40,000. Learning from the
ﬁdget fad, he hopes the new school term
and a smart social-media strategy will see
sales rocket. Teachers, be warned. 7

The Economist September 9th 2017 

UTC buys Rockwell 

Dogﬁght in the
skies

Aerospace suppliers are merging to ﬁght
back against planemakers
WHEN passengers board an aircraft,
only a few care whether it was built
by Airbus or Boeing, two giants that make
all the world’s big airliners. Fewer still
would recognise the names of the thou-
sands of suppliers that produce the 2m or
so parts that go into a modern jet. Surpris-
ingly little of the work is done by Boeing
and Airbus. Boeing has outsourced 70% of
the parts for its 787 aircraft. The job of as-
sembling Airbus’s A380 superjumbo in its
Toulouse factory accounts for only 4% of
the work required to make it. The balance
of power between aerospace ﬁrms and
their suppliers is causing ructions. 
Near hostilities have broken out due to
a run of big mergers among parts-makers.
On September 4th, United Technologies
(UTC), an American conglomerate that
makes Pratt & Whitney engines and other
aerospace parts, announced that it had
agreed to buy Rockwell Collins, an avion-
ics ﬁrm, for $30bn. Although it is one of the
biggest-ever mergers in the aerospace busi-
ness, the deal is just the latest in a series of
supplier tie-ups this year. In April, Rock-
well Collins itself bought B/E Aerospace, a
cabin-interiors specialist, for $8.6bn. Two
months later Safran, a French maker of en-
gines and landing gear, agreed to buy Zo-
diac, a specialist in aircraft seats, for $7.7bn. 
As usual, the ﬁrms’ bosses pledge that
synergies between the businesses will
help fund the deals. UTC wants its merger
with Rockwell to produce $500m in sav-
ings, according to its chief executive, Greg
Hayes. But the imperative behind these
supplier tie-ups lies elsewhere, in the oo-
dles of proﬁt they make from planemakers.
In the past two years, suppliers made proﬁt
margins of between 14% and 17%, com-
pared with 9% for planemakers. The main
reason for the divergence is that the huge
development costs associated with jetliner
programmes are borne by planemakers,
not their suppliers. And assembling parts
is a relatively low value-added activity. 
Confronted with a shrinking number
of new orders, as well as pressure from in-
vestors, both Airbus and Boeing are adopt-
ing a more aggressive stance towards the
suppliers. This means trying to push them
into oﬀering much lower prices today, in
return for future contracts. But that is not
all. By outsourcing the most complex parts
of their aircraft, Airbus and Boeing lost
control of what turned out to be a highly
lucrative market for servicing aircraft, with
airlines as customers. Rolls-Royce, a British

Business 55

engine-maker, makes half its sales and all
its proﬁts from servicing engines. The pair
want this market back if possible. They are
trying to make more parts in-house. In July,
Boeing set up an avionics subsidiary to
make more of its electrical systems itself.
Airbus is cutting back its list of suppliers
and doing more of its own work. 
It is in response to this assault that the
supply chain is consolidating, says Jim
Harris of Bain & Company, a consultancy.
Gaining scale gives suppliers clout with
their customers and with their own supply
chains. The merged UTC and Rockwell will
have annual revenues of $62bn, not far oﬀ

Airbus at $80bn and Boeing at $96bn. 
Unsurprisingly, Boeing has hit the roof
about UTC’s acquisition of Rockwell, and
has threatened to lobby regulators to stop
the deal on competition grounds. Nor is
Airbus happy, particularly as problems
with Pratt & Whitney’s engines are holding
up the delivery of dozens of its jets. It wor-
ries that a merger will distract UTC from re-
solving the problem. It is rare to see two
ﬁrms that have long battled each other
team up on the same side, but there is little
doubt, according to an adviser to Boeing
and Airbus, that they both “have the
knives out for their suppliers”. 7

The electr icity industr y’s nuclear fears

HEMP-induced anxiety

North Korea’s threats send a jolt through American utilities 
WHEN North Korea said on Septem-
ber 3rd that it had developed a
hydrogen bomb, adding that it could be
used for a “super-powerful” high-altitude
electromagnetic pulse (HEMP) attack,
America’s electricity industry was al-
ready on alert. Sceptics tend to dismiss as
far-fetched the idea that the rogue regime
would knock out the electricity grid by
detonating a nuclear bomb high in the
atmosphere. Regulators have not man-
dated safety measures. But the utilities
are taking it seriously enough.
They are more than a year into a
three-year programme, funded by about
60 electricity ﬁrms, to understand the
potential impact of a HEMP attack on the
generation and transmission of electric-
ity, and to ﬁnd ways to shield the net-
work. Such concerns are not new. In 1962,
when America exploded nuclear devices
high above the Paciﬁc, electrical damage
was found in Hawaii. The industry has
also studied analogous space-weather

eﬀects on power systems, such as a geo-
magnetic storm in 1989 that knocked out
power in Quebec. 
But North Korea’s threat has focused
more attention on the matter, says Robert
Manning of the Electric Power Research
Institute (EPRI), a non-proﬁt organisation
that is leading industry eﬀorts. One pro-
blem underlined at a Senate hearing in
May was the armed forces’ reluctance to
share intelligence with utilities, and their
lack of understanding about how to keep
electricity ﬂowing. “We were almost
speaking past each other,” says Mr Man-
ning. Communication has since im-
proved, he adds.
An EMP has three components,
known as E1, E2 and E3, that from high
altitude can spread across thousands of
miles. The shortest, E1, lasts for nanosec-
onds, but can damage electronic compo-
nents such as computers and electricity
infrastructure. E2 is similar to a lightning
strike, longer than E1 but at a lower ampli-
tude. E3 is the longest-lasting and can
aﬀect transmission lines and the trans-
formers connecting output from power
stations to the grid. 
Some have argued that an attack on
America’s power grid could lead to a
catastrophic blackout lasting months. An
EPRI study in February calculated that E3
from multiple detonations was unlikely
to cause mass transformer failure. But it
sees no cause for complacency and is
doing more studies.
Mr Manning says the industry is also
looking for ways to shield equipment
from electromagnetism, for example by
using Faraday cages, metallic structures
that block radio waves, to render the
threat less eﬀective. In Europe and Israel,
experts have long studied HEMP. South
Korea and Japan, also in the line of ﬁre,
are waking up to the threat too, he says. 

When the lights go out

56 Business

India and textiles

Hanging by a
thread

P A N I P A T

The world’s biggest centre for recycling
textiles is fading 
WHEN the doors open to the ware-
house at Ambey Spinning Mills in Pa-
nipat, a city 90km from Delhi, it seems as if
its contents might tumble out like those of
an overstuﬀed cupboard. Heaps of clothes
are piled to the ceiling. Ten women meticu-
lously extract zips, chains and buttons
from T-shirts, winter jackets and denims
using long blades usually used to chop veg-
etables. Outside, a teenage boy wields a
knife to bash synthetic ﬁbre against a tree
stump. In another workshop clothes are
shredded, spun into yarn and woven by
power looms into blankets. Bullock carts
take them for further processing; they are
then sent oﬀ for sale in India and beyond.
Known as the “cast-oﬀ capital”, Panipat
is home to 150-200 such mills, which take
in discarded clothes from Western coun-
tries and turn them into recycled cloth. The
industry employs around 20,000 people
and brings in annual revenues of $62m, ac-
cording to Pawan Garg of All India Wool-
len and Shoddy Mills Association, a trade
body (“shoddy” was originally a non-pejo-
rative word for reclaimed ﬁbre).
Panipat’s history in textiles began after
the Indian subcontinent’s bloody partition
in 1947, when weavers from the province of
Sindh and the districts of Jhang and Mul-
tan in Punjab, ﬁnding themselves sudden-
ly located in Pakistan, were uprooted and
moved to the ancient city. They set up
looms to knit coarse, hand-spun cotton car-
pets, wall hangings and sofa covers (from
new wool) that were an instant hit abroad
(and qualiﬁed as a dowry in marriages in
northern India). The city’s later emergence
as a recycling hub coincided with a slump

in Prato, a small industrial town in Italy
with a 1,000-year-old tradition in textiles.
In the 1990s Panipat mill owners bought
discarded Italian machinery from Prato de-
signed to make cheap shoddy yarn from re-
cycled wool. The industry took oﬀ; its an-
nual revenues rose to over $300m.
Times have since changed. Cheaper
and lighter polyester substitutes are in-
creasingly preferred by wholesale buyers
such as aid agencies, railways and hospi-
tals, whether Indian or foreign. Such mate-
rials need expensive machines that many
Panipat mills cannot aﬀord. Rising labour
costs have squeezed margins. An erratic
electricity supply and frequent machinery
breakdowns are more of a scourge than
ever. Indian winters are shorter, complains
one mill owner, which aﬀects domestic de-
mand for woollen clothing. Most factories
in Panipat are working at half capacity. 
The business is fragmented, poorly or-
ganised and almost wholly unregulated.
Had there been basic oversight by the gov-
ernment, some in the business say, stan-
dards might have risen. Whatever the rea-
sons, the mills did not invest much of their
formerly fat proﬁts into upgrading machin-
ery or workers’ skills. That could have
helped them ﬁnd more customers willing
to pay a premium for high-quality fabric
from recycled yarn, which appeals to envi-
ronmentally conscious companies.
Panipat may help the planet but also ex-
hibits the least attractive features of the tex-
tile business in developing countries:
sweatshop conditions for workers, rock-
bottom pay, use of child labour and so on.
Almost all workers there are contract la-
bourers who earn a tenth of what those in
the formal sector are paid. Women receive
120 rupees ($1.80) a day for manually rip-
ping up around 100kg of garments. Work-
ers manage to sell oﬀ baubles and trinkets
scavenged from the cast-oﬀ clothes but
must often share the proceeds with mill
owners. Despite the bosses’ attention to
such details, “there is no money in it any-
more,” says Mr Garg. 7

Tools of the shoddy trade

The Economist September 9th 2017

Loyalty schemes

Forsake all others

If you want loyalty, get big data
THOSE of a cynical bent might think
Tom Stuker a glutton for punishment.
Over the years, Mr Stuker has ﬂown more
than 18m miles (29m kilometres) on United
Airlines, a carrier not always renowned for
treating its passengers tenderly. Mr Stuker
may possess the world’s most impressive
frequent-ﬂyer account. Over the past half-
decade he has averaged over 1m miles a
year with United. 
Mr Stuker is extreme in his devotion.
But engendering customer loyalty is some-
thing that nearly all ﬁrms strive for. Most
fail. The average American household be-
longs to 28 loyalty schemes. The country is
home to 3.8bn scheme memberships in to-
tal, according to Colloquy, a research ﬁrm,
up from 2.6bn in 2012. More than half of
these accounts go unused. 
Frequent-ﬂyer programmes, introduced
in the 1970s, were the ﬁrst examples of
modern loyalty schemes. They proved to
be a clever bit of marketing. Flyers value
plane seats highly, so a free one feels like a
substantial reward. But airlines can give
away unsold berths at little incremental
cost, because the jet would ﬂy whether
they are ﬁlled or not. Air miles are also sold
to third parties, such as credit-card ﬁrms,
which then use them to reward their own
customers. For airlines, proﬁt margins on
frequent-ﬂyer programmes can be 30-40%,
says Pranay Jhunjhunwala of the Boston
Consulting Group (BCG), a consultancy,
compared with 10% on ﬂights in general. 
Schemes like these are an example of
“earn and burn” rewards, in which cus-
tomers are rewarded for their purchases at
a ﬂat rate, whether a free ﬂight for every
20,000 miles ﬂown or a complimentary
mochaccino for every nine swigged. Ac-
cording to Capgemini, another consultan-
cy, nearly all ﬁrms with a loyalty scheme
use this model. 
Because they are so easy to implement,
they are often used defensively. Many
ﬁrms start a programme only because their
competitors have one, says Steve Grout of
Collinson Group, a loyalty consultancy.
But they are so common that they end up
generating little ﬁdelity. Often “the market
returns to stasis,” argued Lena-Marie Reh-
nen of the Ludwig-Maximilians University
in a paper published in 2016. Some 77% of
earn-and-burn schemes fail in one way or
another within the ﬁrst two years, accord-
ing to Capgemini. 
The best programmes, in contrast, get
highly personal. Customers of Starbucks, 

1

2

The Economist September 9th 2017 

for example, are encouraged to pay for
their daily dose of caﬀeine using a smart-
phone app, which they pre-load with cash.
(An estimated $1.2bn is deposited in Star-
bucks’s loyalty account.) This allows the
ﬁrm to harvest reams of data on its patrons,
including what they drink, at which stores
and at what time of day—perhaps even
whether it is sunny or raining when they
choose a particular beverage. This infor-
mation is then used to target members of
the scheme with individual oﬀers. 
If that sounds a touch intrusive, Star-
bucks’s customers do not seem to mind. In
its latest results in July, the ﬁrm boasted
13.3m active members. Over a third of its
sales in America come through its reward
programme. Customers tend to be happier
handing over personal information when
they get personalised oﬀers in return, says
Javier Anta, another BCG consultant. Some
97% of purchases at Kroger, an American
grocery ﬁrm, are reported to be made by
loyalty-card holders, who receive individ-
ual oﬀers based on their shopping habits.
Such data can be among the most valuable
things a ﬁrm owns. When Caesars Enter-
tainment, a casino group, went bankrupt
in 2015, auditors valued its loyalty database
at $1bn, more even than its property on the
Las Vegas strip.
If data are the grist for the loyalty mill,
then you might assume that the online
giants would be running the best schemes.
Yet this is not necessarily the case. Take
Amazon. “Their philosophy is not good,”
says one loyalty consultant (who asked not
to be identiﬁed). “The amount they spend
on promotions is insane.” Rather than of-
fering across-the-board discounts, he says,
Amazon would be much better served by
designing and targeting customised pro-
motions for particular shoppers as part of a
loyalty scheme.
As Starbucks has shown, many ad-
vances in the loyalty industry are driven
by mobile technology. For a start, it allows
ﬁrms to use location information to send
well-targeted, real-time oﬀers. And storing
scores of cards in an e-wallet, rather than
having to wedge them into a purse, encour-
ages shoppers to use them. A quarter of
people who abandoned schemes did so
because they did not oﬀer a smartphone
app, according to Colloquy. Smartphones
are also increasing the number of ways in
which customers can garner rewards.
Some restaurants, for example, oﬀer points
for those posting photos of their meals on
Instagram, or for “checking in” on Face-
book. The only limit, it seems, will be cus-
tomers’ desire to protect privacy.
Airlines, for their part, have been slow
to keep up. Still, they have the odd card up
their sleeves. In 2011, after Mr Stuker passed
the 10m-mile mark, United Airlines named
one of its jumbo jets after him. Even Star-
bucks would struggle to match that level of
personalisation. 7

Mainland microbrews 

All the beer in
China

H O N G K O N G

Consumers are increasingly willing to
pay up for craft beer
EVIDENCE unearthed at Mijiaya in
Shaanxi province proved that the Chi-
nese have an ancient tradition of making
beer. Brewers were operating 5,000 years
ago, using grains such as millet and Job’s
tears (a kind of pearl barley). This year a
couple of small-scale brewers lovingly re-
created that Neolithic ale. The cloudy, hop-
free beverage would challenge even the
bravest microbrew devotee. Ladislao Ra-
phael of Moonzen Brewery in Hong Kong
describes it as “sour and funky”. 
Yet Mr Raphael and his fellow craft-beer
evangelists are winning converts. The Chi-
nese market, which is the world’s largest, is
dominated by mass-produced lager. But
craft breweries are sprouting up around
the country—by 2016 there were around
150, up threefold from 2015. Consumption
of their brews has surged by two-thirds
over the past ﬁve years, ﬁgures from Glo-
balData show, even as overall beer-swill-
ing declines. This mirrors a global pattern:
consumers often crave better beers as they
get richer. Trend-setters in aﬄuent coastal
regions are drinking less but pricier beer. 
Many craft breweries are foreign-run,
but plenty are Chinese-owned too. It was
foreigners who initially provided most
business for Great Leap Brewing, a stalwart
of Beijing’s craft scene, which set up in 2010
in a traditional courtyard down a dusty hu-
tong (alleyway). Now 75% of its customers
are locals, says Carl Setzer, its American
brewmaster. Panda Brew, founded in Beij-
ing by Pan Dinghao in 2013 with basic
home-brewing equipment, recently began
exporting to Britain. 
Distinctive local tastes have become a

Business 57

feature of the market. Wheat beers are pop-
ular, perhaps because they go well with
Chinese food and locals like to combine ca-
rousing with chewing. Domestic brewers
must also make the most of readily avail-
able ingredients. Barley in China is mostly
poor quality and importing it is costly.
Some brewers use exotic items like Si-
chuan peppers and Oolong tea, which ap-
peal to a sense of local identity.
Doing business in China is rarely has-
sle-free. Small importers buy craft beer on
the grey market and treat it badly, skimping
on the cold storage needed to keep it fresh
on long journeys to Chinese bars and su-
permarkets. This risks sullying craft beer’s
reputation for quality. Another frowned-
on practice is “contract brewing”. Small
breweries are subject to rules that stop
them selling beyond their premises, which
they often circumvent by tapping into big-
ger brewers’ capacity. Beverages made this
way do not always meet craft-beer stan-
dards, but are still sold as such.
Yet as demand for craft beer in America
softens from recent highs, China’s market
still promises much. In March the biggest
brewer of them all, Belgium’s AB InBev,
bought a stake in a Shanghai brewery
called Boxing Cat. Beyond megalopolises
such as Shanghai, speciality beers are sell-
ing well, even though microbrews can cost
ten times as much as locally brewed lager.
In contrast to the sour-tasting brews of Chi-
na’s distant past, craft beer’s future on the
mainland looks likely to be sweet. 7

Infrastructure for electr ic vehicles

Charge of the
battery brigade

The success of electric cars requires
extensive charging networks 
ANEW phrase, “range anxiety”—the fear
that an electric vehicle (EV) will run
out of power before it reaches a charging-
point—entered the Oxford English Dictio-
nary in 2013. At the time a Nissan LEAF, the
world’s best-selling EV, could travel only
120km between charges. A car with a full
tank of fuel will travel 650-800km be-
tween reﬁlls. A motorist relying on batter-
ies has to ﬁnd a public charger, a rare sight
in 2013, or plug in at home to cover the
same distance. Range anxiety has not gone
away as EVs have advanced. But the pro-
blem now feels much more soluble.
Many governments are pushing hard to
replace the internal combustion engine
(ICE) with cleaner EVs—this summer both
Britain and France said that by 2040 new
cars completely reliant on petrol or diesel
will be illegal. By 2050, half the cars on the
road globally, a billion in total, will be bat-

1

Electr ify me

Public electr ic-vehicle charging stations, ’000

United States

Germany

Br itain

2011

12

13

14

15

16

17*

16

12

8

4

0

United States, plug-in electr ic-vehicle sales, ’000

160

120

80

40

0

2011

12

13

14

15

16

Sources: Zap-Map; BDEW; press
repor ts; US Depar tment of Energy

*Latest available

pensive kit but bring charging speeds
down to the time it takes to use a conven-
tional fuel pump. Nissan now has a global
network of 4,000 fast chargers. Last year
Daimler, BMW, Volkswagen and Ford also
said they would together install a total of
400 public charging-points in Europe de-
livering 350KW, which will charge a small
car to three-quarters full in four minutes
and a big vehicle in 12 minutes.
City and national governments are
working on slower roadside charging for
drivers who cannot plug in at home. Oﬃ-
cials in London recently announced plans
for 1,500 new charging-points by 2020. Lo-
cal authorities there are experimenting
with providing low-cost kerbside charging
by enabling streetlights to double up as
charging-points. France, Germany, the
Netherlands and Norway are among the
countries that have launched initiatives to
improve access to public charging. (The EU
is also mulling regulations that will require

The Economist September 9th 2017

all new dwellings to have access to an EV
charging-point.) China’s
government,
which is set on remaining the largest mar-
ket for electric cars, has far bigger plans.
This year alone it is installing 800,000 pub-
lic charging-points, 
including 100,000
semipublic ones at workplaces and for tax-
is and commercial vehicles. 
Companies that do nothing but provide
charging services have their own plans to
invest large sums as more EVs hit the road.
Pat Romano of Chargepoint, based in Cali-
fornia, which runs more charging stations
worldwide than any other ﬁrm, sees work-
place charging as another way of ﬁlling the
charging gap. He notes that for a few thou-
sand dollars spent on the equipment, plus
a cost for electricity that is about the same
as the price of a cup of coﬀee a day, employ-
ers can oﬀer workers free charging in the of-
ﬁce car park. Commercial ﬁrms such as
Chargepoint may well come to dominate
charging away from the home, if only be-
cause they are more focused on it than ei-
ther carmakers or governments. 
Better business models and technology
should further increase the availability of
charging. Chargie, an app that allows own-
ers of home chargers to rent them to the
public much like an Airbnb ﬂat, launched
recently in Britain. Wireless inductive
charging from road to car is already techni-
cally feasible, if expensive; that would
make sense at taxi ranks when vehicles sit
idle, for example. Qualcomm, a chipmak-
er, has demonstrated technology for re-
charging a moving vehicle oﬀ any road sur-
face, although this way of providing
limitless range is still some way oﬀ.
So there seems little likelihood that a
dearth of infrastructure will hold back the
spread of EVs. Some pundits imagine car
parks of the future bristling with charging-
points as plugging in becomes normal and
ﬁlling with liquid fuel is regarded as an ab-
erration. Range anxiety may then be re-
membered only by ageing motorists, along
with other quaint old phrases such as “ﬁll
it up and check the oil”. 7

58 Business

2 tery-powered, reckons Morgan Stanley, a
bank. Falling battery costs mean that the
total cost of EV ownership will soon hit
parity with ICE models. 
Surveys show, however, that car buy-
ers’ worries about charging—where you
can do it, and how long it will take—remain
a big impediment to going electric (after
high prices). Unless buyers can be reas-
sured about the availability and speed of
charging, the EV revolution may progress
at the pace of a milk ﬂoat, not a Tesla in fast-
accelerating “ludicrous” mode.
Better EV batteries with greater capacity
are helping. A range of 190km or more is
now the norm. Nissan’s latest LEAF, un-
veiled on September 6th, will travel nearly
400km between charges. Tesla’s Model S, a
luxury EV launched in 2012, has a range of
500km, as does its new Model 3, a cheaper
car for the mass market. 
As ownership of EVs spreads, another
reassuring fact
is becoming clear: the
amount of daily driving that people actual-
ly do, combined with an ability to charge at
home, mean public charging facilities are
rarely needed. Four out of ﬁve Europeans
drive less than 100km a day. The average
daily distance a car covers in Britain, for ex-
ample, is less than 40km. Americans cover
around 70km a day.
So far, most EVs have been bought by
better-oﬀ motorists, who usually have oﬀ-
street parking with a socket to plug into.
Over 90% of charging is currently done at
home, carmakers say. Charging times at
home are hardly a diﬃculty—a standard
residential electricity supply and a 3.5KW
charger will ﬁll a battery in a smaller car in
about eight hours, as its owner sleeps. A
special 7KW home charger can recharge a
Tesla’s larger batteries in eight hours. A car
with a smaller battery takes just four. 
Yet mass adoption of EVs will mean ap-
pealing to the millions of households
without garages. Nor can people on long
road trips rely on better batteries alone. So
far the rate of increase in the number of
public charging-points in rich countries
has just about kept pace with the growth of
EVs, says Sean O’Flynn of Alix Partners, a
consulting ﬁrm. In America the number of
charging-stations grew by more than a
quarter, to almost 16,000, in 2016 (see
chart). But in most places the system needs
to expand to provide enough chargers of
the right capacities in the right locations. 
Carmakers, governments and commer-
cial charging ﬁrms are all investing. Car-
makers can diﬀerentiate their vehicles by
providing souped-up charging. Tesla plans
to expand its global network of 145KW “su-
percharger” stations, to 10,000. These pub-
lic facilities can replenish the ﬁrm’s larger
batteries to 80%—charged in 40 minutes
(for technical reasons, fast chargers cannot
top up batteries completely). Several other
carmakers are also rolling out their own
fast-charging networks, which need ex-

Finance and economics

The Economist September 9th 2017 59

Also in this section
60 Buttonwood: The Korean cr isis
61 Flood insurance
62 Impact investing
62 The dollar and the euro
63 The scandal at Wells Fargo
64 Free exchange: Government debt,
ﬁscal stimulus and recession

Chinese industr y

Great Leap Backward

J I N A N

Capacity cuts fuel a commodity rally and a debate
STEEL ran in Zhang Cheng’s family for
heft: the country produces nearly as much
three generations. His
grandfather
coal and steel as the rest of the world com-
mined iron ore. His father got a job in the
bined, and even more aluminium and ce-
big state-owned steel mill just outside Ji-
ment. American and European companies
nan, capital of Shandong province. His
have in the past accused China of swamp-
mother worked in the on-site hospital. And
ing their markets with cheap metals. But
Mr Zhang went to the mill-run school,
more recently they have beneﬁted as Chi-
graduating to a job in its foundry, where, in
na’s eﬀorts to curb production have fuelled
the heat of the blast furnace, he rolled met-
a run-up in prices. But then there is the con-
al into thin bars for construction. But after
troversy: doubts about whether the capaci-
nearly two decades in Jinan Steel, he
ty cuts are all they are cracked up to be.
worked his last day there this summer. In
The cuts are certainly ambitious. By
the name of “capacity reduction”—a gov-
2020 the government aims to reduce the
ernment policy to rein in excess produc-
country’s annual capacity for coal produc-
tion of steel—the plant stopped operating
tion by 800m tonnes, or roughly 25% of
in July, and Mr Zhang went on the dole.
what it made last year; its steel capacity by
Since they worked for a state-owned
100m-150m tonnes, nearly 20% of its out-
company, 
the 
local government has
put in 2016; and its aluminium capacity by
helped him and the 20,000 others who
30% in big production centres. When Mao
lost jobs ﬁnd new ones. But it has been a
Zedong launched his catastrophic “Great
struggle for Mr Zhang, a soft-spoken man.
Leap Forward” in 1958, he insisted that
Openings in Jinan are mainly in the service
within 15 years China would produce more
industry—as a waiter in restaurants or an
steel than Britain. China’s new campaign
attendant at a station on the new under-
amounts to a Great Leap Backward: it
ground. He worries that he does not have
wants to eliminate steel capacity equal to
what it takes. “I’ve spent my life interacting
15 times that of Britain.
with machines, not with people,” he says.
When the government unveiled its
That China has persisted in cutting ca-
plans last year, the natural response was
pacity in heavy industry, even at the cost of
scepticism. Yes, authorities had taken to
pushing people out of their jobs, has been
talking tough: Li Keqiang, the premier, said
one of the biggest but also more controver-
that economic reforms would be “like tak-
sial trends in the global economy over the
ing a knife to one’s ﬂesh”. But for years they
past year. It is big because of China’s sheer
had promised capacity cuts that never ma-

For daily analysis and debate on economics, visit
Economist.com/economics

terialised. With local oﬃcials judged to a
large extent on their area’s GDP growth,
they had every incentive to pay lip-service
to reducing capacity, while quietly allow-
ing new investment. By the World Steel As-
sociation’s count, almost half of the steel
policies announced by China from 1990 to
2016 were focused on limiting capacity. Yet
China’s steel mills mushroomed and their
capacity-utilisation rate fell from nearly
90% in 2006 to less than 70% a decade later.
Nearly 18 months into the latest bout of
capacity cuts, China has made believers of
many investors and analysts. The oﬃcial
numbers show it to be well ahead of
schedule. And for those who doubt those
data, two other indicators—price and pro-
ﬁt—show that Chinese heavy industry is
much healthier than just a short while ago.
Coal and steel prices have more than dou-
bled since the start of 2016. Producers of
both, in the red for much of the past half-
decade, have seen their fortunes improve
markedly. Their proﬁts have surged.

Demanding questions
This, however, does not entirely settle the
controversy. As in any market, commodity
prices are determined by supply and de-
mand. At the same time as China has
closed steel mills and halted work at coal
mines, demand for their products has
strengthened, thanks to a property-market
rally and the government’s sustained
splurge on infrastructure. This suggests
that the price rises reﬂect not just the elim-
ination of unused capacity but also greater
use of what had been deemed excessive.
The coal industry is the best example. Last
year the government ordered mines to cap
their production at 276 days, trying to put a
lid on supply; this year, it let them increase
that to 330 days.

1

60 Finance and economics

The Economist September 9th 2017

2

In China this has ignited a heated de-
bate about whether the economy is on the
cusp of a new growth cycle. Proponents ar-
gue that the rebound in industrial proﬁts
has allowed companies to repair damaged
balance-sheets, and that the cuts in capaci-
ty are laying the groundwork for an even-
tual recovery in investment in production
facilities. Others counter that a slowdown
in the property market, visible in recent
weeks, will spell an end to the recovery in
demand, and reveal that current industrial
capacity remains more than suﬃcient. At
least some of the run-up in metal prices
does appear to be excessive. At a meeting

in August, the China Iron and Steel Associ-
ation, an industry body, accused specula-
tors of trying to exploit uncertainty about
capacity cuts.
This points to a separate concern about
the nature of China’s capacity cuts: low
prices ought to have signalled to compa-
nies that it was time to curtail production,
but it took top-down orders from the gov-
ernment to get them to act. Wang Tao of
UBS, a bank, describes the successes to
date as a testament to policy implementa-
tion: “It is diﬃcult to say that market behav-
iour has really changed.” In the coal indus-
try, oﬃcials are struggling to ﬁnd the right

balance, aiming to restrain prices after
their initial eﬀorts drove them up. “It’s like
a car ﬁshtailing,” says Laban Yu of Jeﬀeries,
an investment bank. After skidding a bit, a
driver with some luck and skill can get his
vehicle straight again.
Clownish as that might sound, there is a
chilling subtext for global competitors. Put-
ting a lid on capacity ought also to put a lid
on China’s exports. But another aspect of
China’s campaign is to replace outdated
plants with more modern ones. In the steel
sector, China has already amassed some of
the world’s most
technologically ad-
vanced facilities. It is likely to emerge from 

1

Buttonwood

Gone ﬁssion

the Korean peninsula, dragging in China
and Japan as well, would surely be one of
those “fat tail” events that the models
struggle to assess. But a few brave analysts
are now trying to contemplate the eﬀects.
Besides the terrible humanitarian cost
in both North and South Korea, there could
be immense damage in certain industries.
The global economy is a lot more integrat-
ed than it was during the Korean war of
1950-53. Capital Economics points out that
South Korea produces 40% of the world’s
liquid-crystal displays and 17% of its semi-
conductors. If Japan was the target of mis-
sile strikes from North Korea, as it might be,
the disruption would be even greater. A
war with conventional weapons would be
bad enough; the lasting impact of nuclear
weapons’ use would be immense.
The limited reaction of investors to this
terrible possibility suggests that they do
not believe it will happen and that they
feel the heightened rhetoric on both the
American and North Korean sides is sim-
ply bluster. A recent example was a tweet
from Mr Trump on potential trade sanc-
tions. Rabobank, a Dutch bank, says that
American counter-threats are not per-

Why are investors so relaxed about the behaviour of North Korea?
AROGUE state has tested what may be
a hydrogen bomb and has sent a mis-
sile over the territory of a neighbouring
country. The American president has
promised “ﬁre and fury” if threats contin-
ue. The Security Council of the United
Nations has been locked in debate. This
sounds like the plot of a Hollywood thrill-
er or a paperback potboiler in which the
world is heading for conﬂagration.
But international investors are not
thrilled, and seem barely disconcerted, by
the crisis on the Korean peninsula. Gold
has risen a bit, the yield on Treasury
bonds has dropped and the MSCI World
equity index has fallen since the start of
August. However, the moves have not
been huge. Even the South Korean stock-
market, surely the most sensitive gauge of
war risk, is well above its level at the start
of the year.
What explains this remarkable insou-
ciance? One possibility is that the markets
may simply not be very good at assessing
political risk. After all, investors failed to
foresee either the result of the Brexit refer-
endum in Britain or the election of Presi-
dent Donald Trump.
Another possibility is that investors
have learned in recent decades that geo-
political events—from the September 11th
attacks and the invasion of Iraq to count-
less presidential elections—tend to have
only very short-term impacts on the mar-
kets. Economic growth and corporate pro-
ﬁts are far more important factors. For in-
vestors who use algorithms to trade,
political risk probably has very little bear-
ing on their calculations. 
Go back far enough, however, and it is
possible to ﬁnd political events with huge
ﬁnancial ramiﬁcations—after revolutions
in their countries, the Russian and Chi-
nese governments defaulted on their
debts, for example. A war that engulfed

South Korea’s
composite share-pr ice
index

105

100

95

90

Don’t talk about the war!

August 1st 2017=100

MSCI
World Index

Gold pr ice

US ten-year
Treasur y-bond yield

August

2017

Sep

Source: Thomson Reuters

ceived to be credible. “The distinctly limit-
ed likelihood of the US cutting all trading
links with China should the country con-
tinue to do business with North Korea is a
case in point,” the bank adds.
Just because a war would have disas-
trous economic consequences may not
prevent political leaders from stumbling
into conﬂict, either by accident or because
they have other priorities. In 1909, Nor-
man Angell wrote a book called “The
Great Illusion” which posited that war be-
tween nations would be futile because of
their economic interdependence. Five
years later, war broke out anyway. 
But in the early 20th century, many na-
tions were still ruled by hereditary mon-
archs, for whom economic issues were
not the highest priority. By the late 20th
century, most developed countries were
ruled by professional politicians who re-
cognised that economic success was their
surest route to staying in oﬃce. Recent
conﬂicts in Afghanistan and Iraq did not
involve the same level of commitment as
either the Korean and Vietnam wars, and
thus did not have big economic conse-
quences. This may help explain investors’
conﬁdence that geopolitics will not inter-
rupt the ﬂow of goods and capital. 
It is possible, in an age of populism
and greater nationalism (and at a time
when American hegemony is being chal-
lenged by China), that the calculations of
political leaders have changed again,
making conﬂict more likely. But no
amount of number-crunching based on
past data can properly assess whether
this is the case; it is a judgment call. Inves-
tors have decided that a Korean conﬂict
will not happen. Cross your ﬁngers that
this is one case where the “wisdom of
crowds” will be proved right.

Economist.com/blogs/buttonwood

The Economist September 9th 2017 

Finance and economics 61

2 this round of capacity cuts with even bet-
ter steel mills, giving it a bigger share of the
high-end market.
The closure of Jinan Steel, where Mr
Zhang worked, has been touted in the state
press as an example of China’s seriousness
in cutting capacity. It may in fact be a better
example of industrial upgrading. One op-
tion the company has given laid-oﬀ work-
ers is to move 300km (186 miles) to the east,

to the city of Rizhao, where its parent
group, Shandong Steel, just opened a state-
of-the-art plant. The expected output of the
Rizhao mill is a touch higher than the Jinan
mill. Shandong Steel, in other words, ap-
pears to be replacing capacity, not cutting
it. But that is cold comfort for Mr Zhang: for
its new production lines, the company
wants younger workers, especially those
with university degrees. 7

Insurance in Amer ica

Under water

Flood risk is tricky to insure, and state intervention hinders as much as it helps
THOSE who live on America’s coasts
know to prepare for wrathful hurri-
canes in late summer—nailing plywood to
their windows as the storm approaches.
America’s property insurers and reinsur-
ers are ready, too, using sophisticated mod-
els to track storms and estimate potential
losses. But wind is not the only danger
from hurricanes. Ask Houstonians who
saw their homes inundated by Hurricane
Harvey’s 52 inches (132cm) of rain in the six
days to August 30th. Or those in tthe path
of Hurricane Irma, which, as The Econo-
mist went to press, was wreaking havoc
across the Caribbean. But whereas wind
damage is covered under most standard in-
surance policies in America, ﬂood insur-
ance is a government-run add-on that far
from all homeowners buy. As a result, of
over $30bn in property losses in Texas,
only 40% may be insured.
The National Flood Insurance Program
(NFIP) was set up in 1968, after a series of
large losses led private insurers to pull
back. Those living within a 100-year ﬂood-

plain (ie, with a 1% annual chance of a
ﬂood occurring), as deﬁned by the maps of
the Federal Emergency Management
Agency, and holding a government-guar-
anteed mortgage, are obliged to purchase
NFIP coverage. Others can buy it as an
add-on, but few do. The programme covers
only about 5m properties in all of America.
In Houston much of the damage occurred
outside the ﬂoodplain, so many properties
may be completely uncovered, and left re-
lying on ad hoc federal relief.
For political reasons, NFIP charges low
premiums, pricing out private insurers. But
this also means its income does not cover
all losses, and it is forced to borrow from
American taxpayers. After Hurricanes Ka-
trina in 2005 and Sandy in 2012, the pro-
gramme is $25bn in the red. Moreover, the
rigid caps it puts on coverage ($250,000 per
private house, $100,000 for its contents,
$500,000 per business property, and
$500,000 for its contents) do not suit all
small businesses and homeowners. Large
companies can and do buy private ﬂood

insurance (for which they pay a high price). 
Might a private-sector solution be more
eﬃcient? One diﬃculty is that ﬂood risk is
tricky to model, and so to insure. As Dan
Dick of Aon Benﬁeld, a reinsurance broker,
points out, assessing a property’s ﬂood risk
requires detailed and very localised data
on topography. Insurers have, until recent-
ly, simply not had access to the right data,
or to models sophisticated enough to
gauge ﬂood risk properly. That has changed
over the past decade as specialised model-
ling ﬁrms like RMS, famous for its hurri-
cane modelling, and JBA have started to of-
fer ﬂood models; Aon also has its own
models. Still, private ﬂood insurance re-
mains a tiny part of the market (though last
year the NFIP did, for the ﬁrst time, take out
private reinsurance on some of its risks).
Another obstacle is that ﬂooding is very
heavily concentrated and owners of high-
risk properties are far more likely to seek in-
surance, making it diﬃcult to spread risks.
But other countries show how private in-
surance markets can play a bigger role. In
Britain private insurers include ﬂood cov-
erage as part of standard policies, so risks
are distributed across a wider pool of
policyholders. But the government inter-
venes heavily in reinsurance through a
body called Flood Re. This is meant to keep
insurance aﬀordable even for high-risk ar-
eas through mandatory cross-subsidies, ﬁ-
nanced by a levy on all insurers. 
Germany, for its part, has no direct state
intervention at all in ﬂood insurance. Its
mapping system divides the country into
four zones: areas of ten-, 100-, and 200-year
ﬂoods, and all those beyond. It was devel-
oped by the insurance industry, not the
government, and allows for more sophisti-
cated risk assessment and pricing than
does America’s mandated purchasing. 
Even so, no country has fully faced up
to the thorny questions raised by ﬂood in-
surance. Pooling ﬂood risk means those in
ﬂood-prone areas pay little more than
those in dry ones for insurance, which
weakens the disincentive to build in such
vulnerable areas. Exceptions, such as
Flood Re’s exclusion of ﬂood-prone houses
built after 2009, or NFIP’s discounts for
communities that take measures to reduce
ﬂood risk, are not enough to counter this ef-
fect. Meanwhile, losses from ﬂoods keep
growing: so far, this has mostly been be-
cause of higher property values, says Mi-
chael Szoenyi of Zurich Insurance, but the
trend will continue as climate change in-
creases the incidence of ﬂoods. 
An alternative approach has been tak-
en by the Netherlands, which, despite its
vulnerable position at sea level, does not
have generally available ﬂood insurance.
The country has focused instead on build-
ing robust ﬂood-protection infrastructure.
Recurrent ﬂoods require more than better
insurance arrangements. Dams and dykes
may matter more. 7

62 Finance and economics

Impact investing

Of humanitarian
bondage

A new bond taps private money for aid
projects in war-zones
INVESTORS might be expected to run a
mile from a deal on oﬀer in a conﬂict-torn
part of Africa. At best, it will pay an annual
return of 7%; at worst, 40% of the original
investment is lost. But a dozen social inves-
tors have pooled SFr26m ($27m) to ﬁnance
the world’s ﬁrst “humanitarian impact
bond”, issued by the International Com-
mittee of the Red Cross (ICRC). It will pay
for three rehabilitation centres to be built
and run in the Democratic Republic of
Congo, Mali and Nigeria.
The ICRC’s obligations are backed by
“outcome funders”, ie, donors, mostly gov-
ernments. The bond is an example of “im-
pact investing”, in which private investors
seek out social and ﬁnancial returns, and
of “blended ﬁnance”, in which public
funds help them to do so. Variants have in-
cluded a bond aimed at educating girls in
India and a World Bank-led initiative to
raise money to respond to pandemics. The
novelty in the ICRC’s bond is that the mon-
ey raised will be used in conﬂict zones.
Of the 90m disabled people in the
world in need of a mobility aid, the ICRC
estimates only 10% have access to ade-
quate rehabilitation. So centres that make
wheelchairs, crutches and prostheses, and
train people to use them, can have a big im-
pact. The ICRC helps build and run such
centres all over the world. But its budgets
are set on an annual basis, and it has been
hard to plan ahead. Bond markets can help. 
The coming three years will be used to
build the centres and train staﬀ; by the
fourth year they should be operational. In
year ﬁve comes the reckoning. The eﬃcien-
cy of the new centres will be compared
with a benchmark, based on other centres.
If the new centres outperform, the social
investors will get a return. If the centres do
badly, they will lose money (as will the
ICRC, which faces a penalty of up to 10% of
the bond’s value). The balance will be re-
paid via the ICRC by the donors (although
if the centres do disastrously, they have to
pay only 50% of the original amount).
Having its own “skin in the game” is a
culture shift for the ICRC, explains the orga-
nisation’s Yves Daccord, who thinks it high
time it was more innovative in ﬁnancing
projects. The bond also appeals to donors.
Alexander De Croo, Belgium’s develop-
ment minister, likes the focus on results as
opposed to the usual stress on inputs.
(“You’re a good minister if you spend lots
and you’re a bad one if you spend less.”) 
This ﬁrst experiment focuses on rehab

A giant leap for impact investing

centres because results are easy to quanti-
fy. Eﬃciency can be measured by counting
devices ﬁtted, adjusting for staﬀ numbers
and the diﬀerent times needed to ﬁt diﬀer-
ent aids; historical data abound. Indepen-
dent auditors will check reported eﬃcien-
cy ratios. Mr Daccord dreams of ﬁnding
ways to channel private capital towards
projects that are harder to measure, such as
improving water access or hygiene in un-
stable areas such as Syria and Yemen. He
adds that the new instruments should also
push the ICRC to collect more data, work
more eﬃciently and apply lessons learnt to
its other operations.
The bond’s history, however, shows
how hard such innovations are. Its size is
minuscule against the ICRC’s annual bud-
get of $1.7bn. Yet it took years to get to this
stage. One of the greatest obstacles was to
convince the outcome funders; even well-
meaning Belgium had to change the law to
allow more variable, outcome-dependent
spending. And public servants balked at
paying private investors to proﬁt from the
handicapped. “Why don’t we just borrow
cheaply?” oﬃcials asked Mr De Croo.
A similar culture clash is likely among
investors. There are easier ways to make a
return than investing in conﬂict zones. But
Rebecca Cichon, from Munich Re, an inves-
tor, says she is comfortable with the risks,
given the carefully modelled probable out-
comes. And, she adds, “this is not just
about risk and return.” But it is too much to
hope that many moneymen will change
their stripes and forgo the highest returns
to bask in a do-gooder’s glow. If such bonds
are to become more than tiny niche pro-
ducts, it will require a lot more support
from oﬃcial and private donors. And that
means becoming less queasy about put-
ting the words “proﬁt” and “human suﬀer-
ing” in the same sentence. 7

The Economist September 9th 2017

Currency markets

Fear and favour

Exchange-rate shifts have been helpful
to the global economy
STICKLERS for value have plenty of rea-
sons to frown at ﬁnancial markets.
Much feels out of whack, from squashed
bond yields to pricey stockmarkets. Yet
currency markets, at least, seem to have
shifted in line with fundamentals this year.
Take the euro, for instance. Since the start
of 2017 it has risen by almost 15% against the
dollar, to $1.19 (see chart). That has taken it
much closer to fair value by benchmarks
such as purchasing-power parity (PPP), the
exchange rate at which a basket of goods is
worth the same in diﬀerent countries. The
OECD puts the euro’s PPP at $1.33. That is
quite a stretch from $1.04 in January. “The
elastic had to snap back,” says Kit Juckes of
Société Générale, a French bank.
Of course, the euro’s revival is a result
of more than its being cheap. The anxiety
that elections in Europe might bring to
power anti-euro populists, such as Marine
Le Pen in France, has dissipated. The euro-
zone economy has further strengthened,
raising the prospect that monetary policy
will soon be less accommodating. Even so,
the European Central Bank (ECB) seems in
no hurry to fulﬁl these hopes, in part be-
cause of the euro’s recent surge. The bank’s
rate-setting council met on September 7th,
as The Economist was going to press, and
was expected to keep interest rates un-
changed and to put oﬀ a decision on how
to “taper” its bond purchases. 
The ﬂipside of euro strength is a weaker
dollar. It surged in the weeks after the elec-
tions in November on a belief that big tax
cuts were likely and that a ﬁscal stimulus
of this kind would oblige the Federal Re-
serve to raise interest rates more quickly
than otherwise, pulling capital to America
and lifting the dollar. Hopes of tax reform
have been dashed. Indeed America’s econ-

1

Buck shot

$ per €

1.20

1.15

1.10

1.05

1.00

J F M A M J J A S O N D

J F M A M J J A S

2016

17

Source: Thomson Reuters

The Economist September 9th 2017 

Choppiness and change

Impact of a one-point fall in the VIX volatility
index on currencies against the $

2006-15, basis points

2

1

–

0

+

1

2

3

4

South Afr ican rand

Brazilian real

Turkish lira

Mexican peso

Hungar ian for int

Polish zloty

Indonesian rupiah

Philippine peso

Thai baht

Taiwan dollar

Swiss franc

Japanese yen

Source: Goldman Sachs

“

R

i

s
k
o
n
”
c

u

r
r

e
n

c

i

e
s

“
S
a

f

e
h
a
v
e
n
”
c

u

r
r

e
n

c

i

e
s

2 omy has underperformed. The IMF, for in-
stance, revised down its forecasts for GDP
growth in July. A series of surprisingly
weak inﬂation ﬁgures has made the Fed
more cautious about raising interest rates. 
All this has hurt the dollar. Since the
start of March it has fallen by 6.5% against a
broad basket of currencies weighted by
their importance to America’s trade. This is
good news for the world economy. A weak-
ening dollar has also given a recovery in
emerging-market economies
room 
to
breathe. A weak dollar allows for cheaper
borrowing in dollars in global markets.
Central banks have been able to cut inter-
est rates without worrying that this will
weaken their own currencies and stoke in-
ﬂation. The global appetite for risk-taking
has also helped. When investors are cau-
tious, they cling to “safe haven” currencies,
such as the dollar, yen or Swiss franc. But
when the volatility index (the Vix, or fear
index) falls, the riskier (“risk-on”) emerg-
ing-market currencies tend to do well, ac-
cording to Kevin Daly of Goldman Sachs, a
bank (see chart). 
Can the euro’s winning streak against
the dollar continue? Fundamentals, such
as valuations and current-account bal-
ances (the euro-zone’s big surplus; Ameri-
ca’s big deﬁcit), suggest it should. But such
factors are often a weak pull on currencies.
Other inﬂuences will soon tug in the oppo-
site direction, notes George Papamarkakis,
of North Asset Management, a hedge fund.
The ECB’s anxiety about euro strength is
one. Another is the Fed’s plan to reverse its
programme of quantitative easing, or QE,
by letting its holdings of bonds tail oﬀ. Be-
cause one eﬀect of QE was to weaken the
dollar, its reversal ought
logically to
strengthen it. And the euro has already
travelled quite far on improved sentiment.
Last year it slid because of a fear of Ms Le
Pen, says Mr Papamarkakis. “Now there is
no fear of anything.” 7

Wells Fargo

Stick in the mud

S a n F r a n c i s c o

A year on, a festering scandal eats away
at a still remarkable institution
ON SEPTEMBER 8th 2016, Wells Fargo’s
reputation plummeted abruptly from
that of America’s ﬁnest bank to that of yet
another dodgy company. It was revealed to
have opened an enormous number of po-
tentially unauthorised retail deposit, cur-
rent (checking) and credit-card accounts. A
year on, two questions have yet to be put to
rest. How much harm did Wells do to its
customers? And how much did the scan-
dal hurt the bank itself? 
Wells has not been passive in its re-
sponse. It has produced report after report
on its misdeeds and submitted to investi-
gations by two federal regulators, the Con-
sumer Financial Protection Bureau and the
Oﬃce of the Comptroller of the Currency.
It has purged its chief executive and the
head of its retail bank, clawed back execu-
tive bonuses, transformed its board and
simpliﬁed its formerly decentralised struc-
ture. It has created a comprehensive pro-
cess for restitution and settled a class-ac-
tion suit.
Yet it cannot put the scandal behind it.
In July it was reported that up to 570,000
car-loan customers may have been forced
to buy unneeded insurance. On August 31st
a new report on the initial scandal in-
creased the number of potentially unau-
thorised accounts from 2.1m to 3.5m (ex-
cluding the years from 2002 to 2009, which
could not be examined because of changes
to the bank’s systems). In the latest investi-
gation, an entirely new concern emerged:

Finance and economics 63

another 528,000 potentially unauthorised
accounts for online-bill payment.
That is unlikely to be the end of it. The
full report was not made public, adding to
concerns that other embarrassing pro-
blems have been found. The Department
of Justice has launched an investigation;
New York’s attorney-general has requested
details about the forced car insurance.
Criminal charges are not inconceivable.
Nor are ﬁnes of almost any magnitude;
since the ﬁnancial crisis America’s regula-
tors have proved adept at extracting large
payments from ﬁnancial institutions. Priv-
ate suits are also on the cards. A husband
and wife who were ﬁred have ﬁled suit, al-
leging they were punished for whistle-
blowing. Others among the 5,300 sacked
over the account-creation scandal may
take action, too, claiming they were merely
executing orders. And of course customers
could also go to court. California’s govern-
ment, for one, may be on the verge of mak-
ing it easier for them to do so.
Yet the scandal has done remarkably lit-
tle damage to Wells’s franchise. Over the
past year, Apple and JPMorgan Chase are
the only American ﬁrms to have made
more money. Wells’s return on equity is
not particularly high, but that is true for
banks in general. Compared with its peers
in the industry, it has had good results. Cus-
tomers have not been ﬂeeing. Deposits
have risen and Wells has the leading mar-
ket share in some businesses that require
institutional trust, such as processing auto-
mated clearing-house (ACH) payments,
which underpin credit-card, payroll and all
manner of other transactions.
The scandal forced Wells to dump the
strategy seen as the secret of its success—to
see a branch as a shop and a ﬁnancial pro-
duct as a type of retail good. It now says
shareholder returns are only the last of six
“core values”, after innovation, communi-
ty service and others. But it still monitors
the proﬁtability of client relationships. De-
spite the distractions of the past year, it has
improved the technology in its branches,
with cardless ATM withdrawals and auto-
mated warnings if accounts fall below a
customer-selected level. These are hardly
radical innovations but are new to Ameri-
can ﬁnance, and they matter to customers.
The direct costs of its troubles have
been relatively trivial (though its legal bill
may not seem so to lawyers). It is in the pro-
cess of paying $11m for refunds and com-
pensation tied to the account openings,
$80m for the unwanted car insurance,
$185m for ﬁnes and $142m to settle a class-
action suit. A bit more than 40% that has al-
ready been clawed back from various exec-
utives. The biggest cost to Wells has proba-
bly been paid by its share price. If it traded
at an earnings multiple closer to that of
JPMorgan Chase it would be worth tens of
billions of dollars more. That is the price
not so much of shame, as of uncertainty. 7

 
 
 
 
64 Finance and economics

The Economist September 9th 2017

Free exchange

The borrowers

Political leaders must learn to appreciate the virtues of budget deﬁcits
GOVERNMENTS do not always make the best budget manag-
ers. Assuming it avoids an accidental debt default, America
will run a bigger budget deﬁcit this year than the last, despite a
booming economy. Germany runs a surplus—but scrimps on crit-
ical investments and annoys its euro-area neighbours in the pro-
cess. Japan, cowering under a mammoth public-debt pile, is
weighing raising its consumption tax, though the last rise stran-
gled a tenuous economic recovery. It is awkward, therefore, that
the role of ﬁscal policy as a recession-ﬁghting tool is only grow-
ing. The next downturn will be a painful and dangerous learning
experience for many politicians. 
When that comes, at some point in the next few years, the ini-
tial policy response is easily foreseeable. Central banks, nimbler
than parliaments, will again move ﬁrst. But markets reckon that
two years from now the Fed’s benchmark rate will remain below
2%, the Bank of England’s below 1% and the European Central
Bank’s close to zero. Rates can only go so negative before people
abandon the banking system for cash. So cuts to interest rates will
be limited. By contrast, in the relatively mild recession of 2001 the
Fed cut rates by more than six percentage points. Central-bank as-
set purchases will follow, assuming they are not already happen-
ing, as they might well still be in Europe and Japan. Their eﬀects
will be less powerful than in the past, however. When bond
yields are low, as they are likely to be for the foreseeable future,
bonds do not look much diﬀerent from cash; giving banks cash
for their bonds consequently does little to boost risk-taking. 
If monetary measures do not quickly revive animal spirits, the
pressure on governments to act will grow. Some doubtless will.
Public spending and tax cuts are popular, after all. But politicians
are kept from taking full responsibility for battling recessions by
the intellectual baggage of past decades. Some cling to the notion
that stimulus is unhelpful, risky and hard. 
Such views need updating. Take the notion that ﬁscal stimulus
is ineﬀectual. In the 1970s, before central banks focused so intent-
ly on inﬂation, eﬀorts to boost the economy through borrowing
often contributed more to rising prices than to growth. In the
1980s, the results were little better; hawkish central banks greeted
any development likely to jolt prices with an expansion-squelch-
ing increase in interest rates. Economists of all stripes argued that
the “multiplier” on stimulus—the amount by which a dollar of
borrowing raises GDP—is usually low. Households save their
higher incomes in expectation of oﬀsetting future tax rises; omni-

On borrowed time

General government gross debt as % of GDP, 2007-17 forecast

Percentage-point increase

Debt as % of GDP,
2017 forecast

0

20

40

60

80

Greece
Spain
Por tugal
Japan
Ireland
Br itain
United States
France
Italy
Canada
Germany

Source: IMF

181
99
129
239
75
89
108
97
133
91
65

potent central banks cancel out the stimulative eﬀects. But stud-
ies since the Great Recession tend to ﬁnd that multipliers are sub-
stantially higher than once thought, particularly when monetary
policy is constrained. Multipliers in such cases are often closer to
two, ie, GDP increases by nearly twice the size of the stimulus.
Nonetheless, big debt piles may heighten politicians’ caution
about borrowing (see chart). If a borrower’s ability to repay is in
doubt, he is forced to pay higher interest rates. That raises the cost
of servicing debt, presenting governments with an excruciating
choice between growth-sapping austerity and default. For many
politicians, the ﬁnancial crisis reinforced this lesson. In late 2009
bond yields on Greek debt began rising, after revisions to budget
data revealed that the ﬁscal picture was bleaker than thought.
Yields on the bonds of other peripheral euro-zone economies fol-
lowed suit, spiking on several occasions between 2010 and 2012.
Yet that crisis has receded, and not because the euro area re-
solved its indebtedness problem. With the exception of Ireland’s,
debt levels around the periphery are higher now than at the peak
of the crisis in 2012. Yields instead fell as it became clear that the
ECB would buy the bonds of troubled countries, either because
the survival of the euro demanded it, or to battle deﬂation. In a
world of low interest rates, central-bank asset purchases are likely
to become a conventional policy tool, so the appetite for bonds is
less likely to dry up. The risk of inﬂation remains. But in advanced
economies higher inﬂation usually means that ﬁrms are operat-
ing at capacity; the job of recession-ﬁghting is done. At that point,
a dose of austerity is appropriate, if politically unappetising.

Debt comes for us all
Perhaps most important, recent experience suggests that an ag-
gressive ﬁscal response to economic weakness can in fact be safer
than a more cautious approach. In a paper presented to central-
banking luminaries in August, Alan Auerbach and Yuriy Gorod-
nichenko of the University of California, Berkeley ﬁnd that bursts
of ﬁscal stimulus need not lead to higher debt-to-GDP ratios or to
higher borrowing costs. In some cases, they note, markets revise
down their worries about creditworthiness in response to large-
scale stimulus. Their work echoes an argument made by Brad De-
Long, also of Berkeley, and Larry Summers, of Harvard Universi-
ty. They reckon long periods of limp growth eat away at an econ-
omy’s productive potential, as investments go unmade, for
instance, or as healthy workers drop out of the labour force.
Averting such scarring raises GDP in perpetuity, covering the cost
of the jolt needed to escape the doldrums.
A third argument about activist ﬁscal policy—that it is hard to
get right—remains. Despite the ﬁnancial crisis, governments have
paid scant attention to the practicalities of ﬁscal stimulus; ideally,
programmes should be automatic and proportionate to the se-
verity of the downturn. Labour tax rates could be linked to unem-
ployment ﬁgures, for instance, so that pay packets jump the mo-
ment conditions deteriorate. Funding to local governments could
be similarly conditioned, to limit painful cutbacks by municipal-
ities. To prevent a scramble for worthwhile, shovel-ready infra-
structure projects, governments could make sure to have a ready
queue, so spending could easily scale up in a downturn. 
To use stimulus eﬀectively, politicians must understand the
risks they face and plan accordingly. Sadly, it seems likely to take
more nasty recessions to drive the point home. 7

Economist.com/blogs/freeexchange

Built for today ’s busy professional

TAKING THE GMAT 
EXAM SOON?

         Prepare with our 
adaptive-learning platform 
that ’s as smart as you are.

Economist GMAT Tutor will help you study 
eﬃ  ciently with advanced learning technology that 
adapts to your strengths and weaknesses. Study 
plans include full-length practice tests, online 
tutor support and essay grading , so you have 
everything you need to hit your target score.

iOS and Android mobile app available

TRY IT FRE E

gmat .economist .com /freetrial

Science and technology

Facial technology (1)

Keeping a straight face

loaded from a popular American dating
website, which makes its proﬁles public.
Basic facial-detection technology was
used to select all images which showed a
single face of suﬃcient size and clarity to
subject to analysis. This left 35,326 pictures
of 14,776 people, with gay and straight,
male and female, all represented evenly. 

In the ﬁrst of two stories about faces and technology, artiﬁcial intelligence is used to
spot signs of sexuality
MODERN artiﬁcial intelligence is much
feted. But its talents boil down to a su-
perhuman ability to spot patterns in large
volumes of data. Facebook has used this
ability to produce maps of poor regions in
unprecedented detail, with an AI system
that has learned what human settlements
look like from satellite pictures. Medical re-
searchers have trained AI in smartphones
to detect cancerous lesions; a Google sys-
tem can make precise guesses about the
year a photograph was taken, simply be-
cause it has seen more photos than a hu-
man could ever inspect, and has spotted
patterns that no human could.
AI’s power to pick out patterns is now
turning to more intimate matters. Research
at Stanford University by Michal Kosinski
and Yilun Wang has shown that machine
vision can infer sexual orientation by ana-
lysing people’s faces. The researchers sug-
gest the software does this by picking up
on subtle diﬀerences in facial structure.
With the right data sets, Dr Kosinski says,
similar AI systems might be trained to spot
other intimate traits, such as IQ or political
views. Just because humans are unable to
see the signs in faces does not mean that
machines cannot do so. 
The researchers’ program, details of
which are soon to be published in the Jour-
nal of Personality and Social Psychology, re-
lied on 130,741 images of 36,630 men and
170,360 images of 38,593 women down-

Out of the numbers
The images were then fed into a diﬀerent
piece of software called VGG-Face, which
spits out a long string of numbers to repre-
sent each person; their “faceprint”. The
next step was to use a simple predictive
model, known as logistic regression, to
ﬁnd correlations between the features of
those faceprints and their owners’ sexual-
ity (as declared on the dating website).
When the resulting model was run on data
which it had not seen before, it far outper-
formed humans at distinguishing between
gay and straight faces. 
When shown one photo each of a gay
and straight man, both chosen at random,
the model distinguished between them
correctly 81% of the time. When shown ﬁve
photos of each man, it attributed sexuality
correctly 91% of the time. The model per-
formed worse with women, telling gay
and straight apart with 71% accuracy after
looking at one photo, and 83% accuracy
after ﬁve. In both cases the level of perfor-
mance far outstrips human ability to make

The Economist September 9th 2017 67

Also in this section
68 Making faces from DNA
69 Antibiotic resistance in ﬁsh farms
70 Farewell Cassini

For daily analysis and debate on science and
technology, visit
Economist.com/science

this distinction. Using the same images,
people could tell gay from straight 61% of
the time for men, and 54% of the time for
women. This aligns with research which
suggests humans can determine sexuality
from faces at only just better than chance.
Dr Kosinski and Mr Wang oﬀer a possi-
ble explanation for their model’s perfor-
mance. As fetuses develop in the womb,
they are exposed to various levels of hor-
mones, in particular testosterone. These
are known to play a role in developing fa-
cial structures, and may similarly be in-
volved in determining sexuality. The re-
searchers suggest their system can pick up
subtle signals of the latter from the former.
Using other techniques, the program was
found to pay most attention to the nose,
eyes, eyebrows, cheeks, hairline and chin
for determining male sexuality; the nose,
mouth corners, hair and neckline were
more important for women. 
The study has limitations. Firstly, im-
ages from a dating site are likely to be par-
ticularly revealing of sexual orientation.
The 91% accuracy rate only applies when
one of the two men whose images are
shown is known to be gay. Outside the lab
the accuracy rate would be much lower. To
demonstrate this weakness, the research-
ers selected 1,000 men at random with at
least ﬁve photographs, but in a ratio of gay
to straight that more accurately reﬂects the
real world; approximately seven in every
100. When asked to select the 100 males
most likely to be gay, only 47 of those cho-
sen by the system actually were, meaning
that the system ranked some straight men
as more likely to be gay than men who ac-
tually are. 
However, when asked to pick out the
ten faces it was most conﬁdent about, nine
of the chosen were in fact gay. If the goal is
to pick a small number of people who are 

1

The Economist September 9th 2017

images that could be matched to real pho-
tographs for eight out of ten people. (This
fell to a less impressive ﬁve out of ten when
the test was restricted to those of a single
race, which narrows facial diﬀerences.)
About a year ago, using the same algo-
rithm, the company produced a prediction
of what your correspondent looked like at
the age of 20 from her genome. The result
can be compared below with a photo-
graph of her at that age. Readers can judge
for themselves if it is a reasonable likeness. 
Critics immediately took to social me-
dia to dispute the ﬁndings. Jason Piper, a
former employee of Human Longevity, ar-
gued that “because everyone looks close to
the average of their race, everyone looks
like their prediction”. One thing in Dr Ven-
ter’s favour, however, is that the ﬁndings
are based on a relatively small group of
people. With machine-learning
tech-
niques, the larger the set of data the better
the results; working with tens of thou-
sands of genomes could well improve the
prediction rate.
Creating pictures of people’s faces from
their genomes has a number of potential
uses, especially in forensic science. It might
be possible to reconstruct the face of a per-
petrator from any genetic material they
have left behind, such as blood or body ﬂu-
ids. That would allow police to “see” the
face of suspects in cases of murder, assault
and rape. It could also help with identify-
ing unrecognisable victims who have been
burned or maimed. Unsolved cases might
be reopened if suitable samples were still
available.
As Dr Venter is quick to point out, this
technology has other implications, among
them for privacy. He considers that geno-
mic information must now be treated as
personal information, even if it is present-
ed as an anonymised sequence of let-
ters—as is currently the case in some coun-
tries. It will, he warns, be possible to 

1

68 Science and technology

2 very likely to be gay out of a large group,
the system appears able to do so. The point
is not that Dr Kosinski and Mr Wang have
created software which can reliably deter-
mine gay from straight. That was not their
goal. Rather, they have demonstrated that
such software is possible. 

To calculate the selves of others
Dr Kosinski is no stranger to controversial
research. He invented psychometric proﬁl-
ing using Facebook data, which relies upon
information in a person’s proﬁle to model
their personality. The Trump campaign
used similar models during last year’s pres-
idential campaign to target voters, an ap-
proach which has generated criticism. 
Dr Kosinski says he conducted the re-
search as a demonstration, and to warn
policymakers of the power of machine vi-
sion. It makes further erosion of privacy
“inevitable”; the dangers must be under-
stood, he adds. Spouses might seek to
know what sexuality-inferring software
says about their partner (the word “gay” is
10% more likely to complete searches that

Facial technology (2)

Making faces

begin “Is my husband…” than the word
“cheating”). In parts of the world where be-
ing gay is socially unacceptable, or illegal,
such software could pose a serious threat
to safety. Dr Kosinski is at pains to make
clear that he has invented no new technol-
ogy, merely bolted together software and
data that are readily available to anyone
with an internet connection. He has asked
The Economist not to reveal the identity of
the dating website he used, in order to dis-
courage copycats.
It is true that anyone wishing to repli-
cate Dr Kosinski’s work to determine inti-
mate traits from faces will face signiﬁcant
challenges in applying laboratory science
to the outside world. But they will be
helped by ever-growing volumes of data
and improving algorithms. “The latter,
over time, inevitably win,” says Alessan-
dro Acquisti of Carnegie Mellon Universi-
ty, who has shown that an individual’s so-
cial security number can be discovered
using face recognition and online informa-
tion. For those with secrets to keep, all this
is bad news. 7

mensional images of their faces, and mea-
sured their eye and skin colour, age, height
and weight. This information was used as
a “training set” to develop an algorithm ca-
pable of working out what people would
look like on the basis of their genes. 
Applying this algorithm to unknown
genomes, the team was able to generate

Researchers produce images of people’s faces from their genomes
CRAIG VENTER, a biologist and boss of
Human Longevity, a San Diego-based
company that is building the world’s larg-
est genomic database, is something of a re-
bel. In the late 1990s he declared that the in-
ternational, publicly funded project
to
sequence the human genome was going
about it the wrong way, and he developed
a cheaper and quicker method of his own.
His latest ruﬄing of feathers comes from
work that predicts what a person will look
like from their genetic data.
Human Longevity has assembled
45,000 genomes, mostly from patients
who have been in clinical trials, and data
on their associated physical attributes. The
company uses machine-learning tools to
analyse these data and then make predic-
tions about how genetic sequences are tied
to physical features. These eﬀorts have im-
proved to the point where the company is
able to generate photo-like pictures of peo-
ple without ever clapping eyes on them. 
In a paper this week in Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences, Dr Ven-
ter and his colleagues describe the process,
which they call “phenotype-based geno-
mic identiﬁcation”. The group took an eth-
nically diverse group of 1,061 people of dif-
ferent ages and sequenced their genomes.
They also took high-resolution, three-di-

What the genes predicted, and what we got

The Economist September 9th 2017 

2 construct a face from the limited genetic
data that people currently post online, for
example, from DNA-testing services such
as 23andMe. 
This in turn raises the possibility that
people may no longer be willing to have
their genetic information included in pub-
lic sequencing eﬀorts, even though such
work can help combat diseases. If facial
projections can be made from genomes,
then someone’s appearance could subse-
quently be matched to real online photo-
graphs. This might mean that people’s ge-
netic sequences, and all their ﬂaws, could
be connected to their identity in public. 
The connection between genes and
faces can work both ways. Just as genomes
can be used to build up a picture of faces,
so facial features are able to reveal genetic
diseases. It is reckoned that 30-40% of ge-
netic diseases cause changes to the shape
of the face or skull, allowing, in some cases,
experienced doctors to diagnose a condi-
tion simply by looking at a patient’s face.
So why not train an app to do that?

Face healer
Companies already are. Face2Gene is a
smartphone app developed by FDNA, a
startup based in Boston co-founded by
Moti Shniberg and Lior Wolf. Mr Shni-
berg’s previous venture was bought by Fa-
cebook to develop the photo-tagging fea-
ture that
identiﬁes people in pictures
uploaded to the social-media site. The
FDNA app allows a doctor to snap a picture
of a patient, upload it to the internet (along
with the patient’s height, weight and clini-
cal data) and let the ﬁrm’s algorithm pro-
duce a list of possible diseases from its on-
line database. The app can access
information on 10,000 diseases; facial rec-
ognition works for 2,500 of them, so far.
Each diagnosis comes with a probabili-
ty score that reﬂects the chances of the app
being correct. It also lists any genetic muta-
tions known to cause the disease, which
can help with an analysis of a patient’s
condition. Dekel Gelbman, FDNA’s chief
executive, estimates that the app is being
used by doctors and researchers in 130
countries. The patients’ data are stored se-
curely, anonymised and encrypted.
As with Dr Venter’s work, the deeper
the pool of data available to facial re-
searchers, the more valuable it becomes.
Christoﬀer Nellaker of the University of
Oxford has set up a website called “Miner-
va & Me”, where both the healthy and
those with diseases can upload pictures of
themselves and provide consent for their
images to be used for studies. He is also set-
ting up a network, the Minerva Consor-
tium, to encourage artiﬁcial-intelligence re-
searchers to share their data.
Maximilian Muenke of the National
Human Genome Research Institute in Be-
thesda, Maryland and Marius Linguraru of
the Children’s National Health System in

Washington, DC, and their colleagues are
trying to broaden things out, too. They
have published a series of studies using fa-
cial-recognition algorithms
that were
trained with photos of African, Asian and
Latin American patients to identify diﬀer-
ent genetic diseases with accuracies of
more than 90%. In many poor countries,
expensive antenatal tests to identify genet-
ic diseases are not available. A baby with
Down’s syndrome, for example, is usually
identiﬁed before birth in Europe and
America, but in poor countries many are
not diagnosed before they are a year old.
The researchers intend to produce an app
that will help doctors to identify dozens of
the most common syndromes using a
smartphone. 7

Fish farming

Feeding-time
worries

Antibiotic resistance in ﬁsh farms is
passed on from ﬁsh food
THE mucky sediment below ﬁsh farms
usually teems with antibiotic-resistant
bacteria. The presence of such bacteria is a
cause of increasing concern because resis-
tance can limit the ability to ﬁght diseases,
but it is also not that surprising: piscicultur-
alists have a long history of dosing ﬁsh
they are breeding and rearing with antibi-
otics. But some scientists suspect there is
more to it than that. One group, led by Jing
Wang of Dalian University of Technology
in China, has found that the problem is
also linked to what the ﬁsh are being fed. 
Dr Wang knew from previous reports
that ﬁsh farmers who had not used antibi-
otics for years, or had never used them at

Science and technology 69

all, still had sediment in their marine farms
carrying bacteria with many of the genes
associated with drug resistance. The genes
had to be getting into the bacteria some-
how; one possible pathway was through
antibiotic-resistance genes in ﬁsh food
mingling in various ways with bacteria in
the sediment. 
Working with a team of colleagues, Dr
Wang set up an experiment to ﬁnd out if
that was the case. As they report in Environ-
mental Science and Technology, the re-
searchers obtained ﬁve commonly used
ﬁshmeal products and subjected each one
to a detailed genetic analysis. This revealed
the presence of 132 drug-resistance genes,
suggesting that heavy antibiotic use on the
ﬁsh products which are 
themselves
ground up into ﬁshmeal formulations, was
behind the transfer of genes. 
But that, too, was not as straightforward
as it seemed. Further analysis revealed that
of the ﬁve products, the one with the high-
est concentration of residual antibiotics
was a ﬁshmeal from Russia. It contained 54
nanograms of antibiotics per gram of food,
although it had only eight resistance genes
present. In contrast, a ﬁshmeal from Peru
had just 16 nanograms of antibiotics per
gram of food, but carried a disturbing 41 re-
sistance genes. 
The next step was to discover whether
mixing resistance genes from ﬁsh food into
bacteria-rich sediments would allow the
resistance traits to transfer over. To test this
out, the team set up microcosms of ﬁsh
farms in ﬂasks containing 300 millilitres of
seawater and 200 grams of sediment. The
microcosms were incubated and gently
shaken periodically for 50 days and then
had a small amount of the Peruvian ﬁsh-
meal added to them, or were left un-
touched to function as controls. The re-
searchers
regularly collected bacterial
samples from the sediments for a further
50 days and analysed them. 
The results were clear. Although the
control microcosms started with some re-
sistance genes present (as there is bound to
be in nature) the number did not increase.
In contrast, the number of resistance genes
present in the microcosms exposed to the
Peruvian ﬁshmeal increased tenfold. 
The discovery of ﬁsh food as a source of
resistance genes migrating into oceanic
bacteria is worrying, and the researchers
say more work is needed to determine if
these resistance traits can ﬁnd their way
into the human food chain. But, says Dr
Wang, the Russian ﬁshmeal, which clearly
came from ﬁsh that had been given a lot of
antibiotics before being ground up yet did
not contain much resistant genetic materi-
al, points to a solution. This is to concen-
trate on processing methods that destroy
the DNA in ﬁshmeal with heat and chemi-
cals. That should rid ﬁsh feed of much of its
cargo of resistance genes before the food is
packed and shipped. 7

The Economist September 9th 2017

bottom of the ocean, in hydrothermal
vents—chimney-like outcrops that form
when mineral-laden water seeps through
hot rocks at the ocean ﬂoor. Those early
cells would have used hydrogen as an en-
ergy source (some modern microbes can
perform the same trick). That Enceladus
seems to have all the ingredients necessary
for a repeat performance has, for astrobiol-
ogists at least, transformed it into the most
exciting destination in the solar system.
But Enceladus is not the only Saturnian
moon with intriguing similarities to Earth.
Another trove of spectacular science was
provided by the Huygens lander, which set
down on Titan on January 14th 2005. 
If Enceladus is a tiddler among moons,
Titan is a whopper. Its radius of 2,575km
makes it bigger than the planet Mercury. It
is also the only moon in the solar system
with a thick atmosphere, too dense for
Earth-bound telescopes to penetrate. But,
thanks to photographs taken by Huygens
as it plunged through that atmosphere, Ti-
tan is known to be one of only two bodies
in the solar system (the other being Earth)
with free-standing liquid on its surface.
Like Enceladus, Titan is a chilly place,
and so those liquids are hydrocarbons
rather than water. But, like water, they
evaporate into Titan’s atmosphere, from
where they fall as rain. These rains produce
geological features that are rare elsewhere
in the solar system: streams, rivers and trib-
utaries carving valleys and laying down
deltas before ﬂowing into large lakes. Be-
sides Titan, only Mars and Earth have simi-
lar features. And while Mars’s rivers and
lakes have been dry for hundreds of mil-
lions of years, Titan’s are still wet today.
The smorgasbord of science provided
by Cassini and Huygens has led astrono-
mers to sketch a clutch of follow-up mis-
sions, including one to ﬂy a sample of En-
celadian water to Earth, and another to
drop a robotic boat onto Titan’s lakes.
None has yet been given the green light.
The long journey (Cassini took more than
six years to reach Saturn) means that none
could arrive before the end of the next de-
cade at the earliest. But astronomers’ appe-
tites have been thoroughly whetted. 7

70 Science and technology

Astronomy

So long, and thanks for the postcards

urn’s moons as among the most promising
places in the solar system to look for life.
That moon, called Enceladus, is a tiny
ball of ice just 500km across. Its frozen sur-
face reﬂects much of the dim sunlight that
shines upon it, giving a surface tempera-
ture of around -200°C. That does not
sound very enticing. But in 2005 Cassini
spotted plumes of water vapour shooting
into space from the moon’s southern pole
(the plumes are thought to be the source of
one of Saturn’s many rings). The vapour
seems to be welling up from an ocean be-
neath the moon’s icy shell. Exactly how it
is kept liquid is a mystery, but friction gen-
erated by Saturn’s potent gravity, which
kneads and ﬂexes the moon’s core as it or-
bits its giant parent, seems to be at least
part of the answer. Measurements taken
by Cassini suggest the ocean covers the en-
tire moon to a depth of perhaps 30-40km. 

After more than a decade exploring Saturn, the Cassini space probe faces a ﬁery
end to its mission
ON SEPTEMBER 11th, around 1.2bn kilo-
metres from Earth, Cassini, a robotic
spacecraft that has been orbiting Saturn for
13 years, will make a ﬁnal ﬂypast of Titan,
Saturn’s biggest moon. Since April the
NASA craft has been conducting a series of
long, looping orbits that take it between
Saturn itself and the innermost of the plan-
et’s famous rings. After passing Titan, Cas-
sini will dive back towards Saturn, but this
time, it will not return. On September 15th,
at about 1pm London time, it will kiss the
outer edges of Saturn’s atmosphere and
begin to tumble, losing contact with Earth.
A few minutes later it will burn up as a
shooting star, bringing down the curtain
on a long and dramatic mission to an un-
der-explored corner of the solar system. 
Cassini is not the ﬁrst spacecraft to visit
Saturn. Pioneer 11 ﬂew past in 1979 on its
way to the outer solar system, as did the
two Voyager space probes a few years later.
But it is the ﬁrst to stick around. Since its ar-
rival in 2004 it has discovered six new Sa-
turnian moons, and seen evidence of an-
other coalescing among one of the planet’s
rings. It has peered at a storm that rages at
Saturn’s south pole, akin to the Great Red
Spot on Jupiter, and investigated the vast
hexagonal cloud formations, far larger
than the Earth, which swirl around the
north pole. Shortly after its arrival it de-
ployed another probe called Huygens, a ro-
botic laboratory run by the European
Space Agency, that landed on the surface
of Titan.
Even now, Cassini is in good working or-
der. The three radioisotope generators on
ship, which use the slow decay of a lump
of plutonium to provide it with electricity,
could keep working for decades to come.
But the craft would soon run out of rocket
fuel, which would mean its trajectory
could no longer be controlled. There were
plenty of ideas about what to do when that
happened; one was to put it into a stable or-
bit high above Saturn where it could con-
tinue making observations for years. 
The suicide mission was chosen for two
reasons. One was that it would provide a
great deal of valuable science. The other
was that it would remove the risk that the
probe might, in the distant future, collide
with one of Saturn’s moons, potentially
contaminating it with hardy microbes that
might have survived the journey from
Earth. That may seem fastidious to the
point of paranoia. But thanks to Cassini’s
eﬀorts, scientists now count one of Sat-

Water world
As far as terrestrial biochemists know, liq-
uid water’s peculiar properties make it a
necessity for life, so subterranean oceans
are seen as places worth examining. NASA
is planning a mission to Europa, a moon of
Jupiter, for just such a reason. But water is
not enough by itself. You also need a vari-
ety of chemical raw materials to support
the reactions necessary for life, and a
source of energy to run them. 
Thanks to Cassini, scientists know that
Enceladus has both. When the probe ana-
lysed the plumes in 2008 it found traces of
relatively complicated organic molecules
that might serve as precursors to life. More
recently, in April, it discovered traces of hy-
drogen in Enceladus’s plumes. 
The best current theory to explain the
origin of life on Earth is that it began at the

On a mission to the end

Books and arts

John le Carré

George Smiley returns. Really?

A Legacy of Spies. By John le Carré.

Penguin Viking. 264 pages. $28 and £20

The old master, in perhaps his ﬁnal venture, is as enigmatic as ever
SO GEORGE SMILEY is back at last. That,
at any rate, is the marketing come-on for
John le Carré’s 24th novel, two decades
after the wily old spymaster is generally
reckoned to have crept into well-deserved
if mysterious retirement. Since the collapse
of the Soviet Union and the defeat of Smi-
ley’s relentless adversary, Karla, Mr le
Carré has been exploring other juicy
themes, including the arms trade, Islamic
jihad, the war on terror, the wickedness of
pharmaceutical and mining companies in
Africa and skulduggery in Latin America. 
The moral ambiguities in the conduct
of the cold war and the blurry nature of
treachery—the leitmotifs of his earlier nov-
els—have given way to a bristling anger,
even rage, over what Mr le Carré sees as the
turpitude of the West, especially of Ameri-
ca, in a horrid new world order where Smi-
ley has no place. The quizzical mole-catch-
er and agent-runner, played unforgettably
by Alec Guinness in 1979 (pictured), would
surely no longer feature in the author’s
new cast of characters.
But not quite. In “A Legacy of Spies” the
reader is taken back to one of Mr le Carré’s
earliest novels of espionage, “The Spy
Who Came in from the Cold”, in which
Alec Leamas, a heroic agent, and his lover,
Liz Gold, an idealistic British communist,
are murdered as they try to escape west-
ward over the wall after a botched mission
into East Berlin. Half a century on, in this

new age of litigation which the author
plainly deplores, the hapless pair’s hither-
to unheralded children have somehow
clubbed together to take the British intelli-
gence service to court, demanding an apol-
ogy, compensation, justice, revenge. Smi-
ley was in charge of that operation. Will he
now be hauled back to face the charge of
sacriﬁcing innocent people for a supposed-
ly higher cause? Is Smiley, mentioned cryp-
tically like a will-o’-the-wisp as the narra-
tive unfolds, even alive? And if so, will he
get his just deserts, whatever they may be? 
The protagonist of “A Legacy of Spies” is
Peter Guillam, trustiest of Smiley’s opera-
tors in the ﬁeld, who has long since retired
to a farm in Brittany. Guillam is called up
by his old bosses in London and their 
lawyers to help them cover their backs.
Presumably they want him to take the rap,
as the bitter descendants of his fallen 
colleagues, egged on by a parliamentary
committee, demand explanations and
vengeance for the sins of the intelligence
service committed for a cause that the new
generation can barely remember, let alone
understand or sanctify.
Flashbacks from Guillam’s memory
and documents culled from the dusty ar-
chives help to replay the events leading to

The Economist September 9th 2017 71

Also in this section
72 Asia’s reckoning
72 Sport and technology
73 Johnson: Gener ic brand names
74 Sport and the mind
74 Ir ish ﬁction

For daily analysis and debate on books, ar ts and
culture, visit
Economist.com/culture

the deaths of Leamas and Gold. More har-
rowing still, Guillam is forced to recount
the exﬁltration of a beautiful East German
agent who was forced to leave behind her
six-year-old son. Guillam and she had had
a brief but passionate aﬀair (which he re-
fuses to disclose to the secret service’s law-
yers) before she was found hanged in the
wood near a supposed safe house in the
English countryside during her debrieﬁng.
The narrative is spasmodically grip-
ping, with Mr le Carré at his old best in full
ﬂow. His ear for dialogue is as acute as ever.
His wit and humour (qualities of his that
are too seldom recognised) are as sharp.
No one is better at conveying the wrinkles
of British class distinction in speech and
manner. The cross-questioning of Guillam
by the modern spy service’s supremely
ghastly lawyers is hilarious and horrifying.
If the tale of double-cross and subterfuge is
occasionally confusing and implausible,
that is the nature of the beast. 
Yet one queries the purpose of this lat-
est yarn. The moral ambiguity can never
be better told than in Mr le Carré’s earliest
novels. And what of Smiley? Has he truly
come in from the cold war? Has he
achieved some kind of fulﬁlment? Of
course not. Guillam needs the old man’s
succour and support to clear his name. He
tracks Smiley down to a library in Freiburg,
where the elderly spy seems to be delving
into some abstruse historical puzzle, may-
be pertaining to the Holy Roman Empire.
Reﬂecting Mr le Carré’s own preferences,
he is culturally comﬁest in Germany. 
Smiley in old age, like Mr le Carré, is an-
gry. Over dinner with Guillam, he asks
plaintively what the long game of espio-
nage was all for. “Was it all in the great
name of capitalism? God forbid. Christen-
dom? God forbid again…Was it all for Eng-
land, then? There was a time, of course 

1

72 Books and arts

2 there was. But whose England? Which Eng-
land? England all alone, a citizen of no-
where?” he says, in a mocking swipe at a
recent phrase of Britain’s current prime
minister. “I’m a European, Peter,” says Smi-
ley. “If I had a mission—if I was ever aware
of one beyond our business with the ene-
my, it was to Europe. If I was heartless, I
was heartless for Europe.” 
But is this really Mr le Carré’s last word,
voiced through his ﬁctional alter ego? 
Perhaps. The author, after all, is 86 next
month. Only a year ago he wrote his own
beguiling memoir, “The Pigeon Tunnel”, a
companion piece—in some respects a 
riposte—to Adam Sisman’s magisterial 
biography. If this is truly the denouement
of the mystery of George Smiley and indi-
rectly of Mr le Carré himself, there is some-
thing odd about it. It does not have the feel
of closure. 7

The future of Asia

Brothers in arms

Asia’s Reckoning: China, Japan and the
Fate of US Power in the Paciﬁc Centur y. By

Richard McGregor. Viking; 396 pages; $28.
Allen Lane; £20
TO TWIST the old Anglo-American saw,
China and Japan are two countries sep-
arated by a partly shared (written) lan-
guage and culturally much else. Yet these
two nations are among the great unrecon-
ciled of the 20th century’s warring parties.
Worse, they are moving further apart.
China and Japan have been regional ri-
vals for at least a millennium, but began to
cross swords only in the late 19th century.
Before then, they had shared art, writing,
Confucianism and Buddhism but other-
wise stood apart, albeit sometimes a tad
sullenly, with most Japanese rulers refus-
ing to pay tribute to Chinese emperors in
the manner expected of other neighbours.
But then from 1895 until 1945 they were re-
peatedly at war—constantly, in the oﬃcial
Chinese account—and it is the legacy of
that half-century that sours relations today.
The funny thing, as Richard McGregor
shows in this well-documented account of
the post-war triangular relations between
China, Japan and America, is that after 1945
there was initially little tension between
the two. Mao Zedong’s China waived rep-
arations claims and made no real fuss
about territorial issues. 
It was only in the 1980s that friction
over interpretations of 20th-century his-
tory and Japan’s willingness or otherwise
to apologise for it started to heat things up,
reaching boiling point at various times dur-
ing the succeeding decades. After the Com-

munist Party’s scare over the Tiananmen
protests in 1989, demonisation of Japan
played a central role in Chinese national-
ism, even as the claim that the Japanese
might revert to their pre-war militarism has
become less and less plausible. And hostil-
ity to China, along with revisionist views
of history, have played growing roles in
Japanese nationalism, too.
What to make of this? Are these, in the
old Maoist phrase, just paper tigers or
could they become real ones again? Mr
McGregor is well placed to answer. He was
born in Sydney and has worked as a jour-
nalist (for the Australian and the Financial
Times) in both Tokyo and Beijing, and he
speaks both languages. This gives him 
access to a range of archives and memoirs
beyond the reach and nuanced compre-
hension of most other scholars.
His narrative of relations and contacts
between the leading politicians and poli-
cy- makers in both countries, and of Amer-
ica’s interplay with the two, makes for a
compelling and impressive read. One no-
table feature is how often the Americans,
from Henry Kissinger to Barack Obama,
seem to ﬁnd their close Japanese allies
more irritating and harder to understand
than their Chinese counterparts, even as a
rising China is coming to be seen as Ameri-
ca’s greatest 21st-century challenger.
There is however a weakness with this
narrative approach. Rather as television
news often overlooks events and ideas if
there is no video footage to go with them,
so this very archive-led book tends to sacri-
ﬁce analysis and the bigger picture.
A prime and very current example is
North Korea. Between 1910 and 1945, the 
Korean peninsula was a Japanese colony.
The Korean war of 1950-53 brought Chinese
and American forces into combat, leading
to a much hotter unreconciled set of rela-

Manners maketh men

The Economist September 9th 2017

tionships than the Sino-Japanese one. Yet
tensions over and with both Koreas, and
strategic concerns about the peninsula, get
fewer mentions because they do not fea-
ture much in the archives of bilateral or tri-
lateral relations. That is fair enough, but it
makes this a history book, not a work of
contemporary analysis.
If there is to be war in East Asia, North
Korea’s latest nuclear test on September
3rd suggests it is more likely to break out in
Korea than over the small set of rocky islets
in the East China Sea that China and Japan
use to niggle each other or over the 
commemoration of war criminals in the
Yasukuni Shrine in Tokyo. Moreover, if the
Chinese were to do the logical thing to
avert a nuclear exchange by invading
North Korea or forcing regime change
there, which would put the North under
their own nuclear umbrella, this would do
more to swing the strategic balance in the
region away from America and Japan and
towards China than any other act. That
would be Asia’s truest “reckoning”. 7

Sport (1)

On your marks,
get tech

Game Changer: The Technoscientiﬁc
Revolution in Sports. By Rayvon Fouché.

Johns Hopkins University Press; 264 pages;
$29.95
ATHLETES have always sought an edge.
Ancient Greeks at the original Olym-
pics wrote jinxes against their rivals on
lead strips and ate raw testicles before
events. Cyclists in the Victorian era dab-
bled with cocaine. The Boston Red Sox, a
baseball team, are under investigation for
illegally relaying signals to players using an
Apple Watch. The great fallacy of sport, ac-
cording to Rayvon Fouché, a professor at
Purdue University and a former competi-
tive cyclist, is that people treat it as “the last
bastion of meritocracy”. In fact, as his new
book “Game Changer” demonstrates, “it is
really about how to garner and exploit the
largest legal or illegal competitive advan-
tage possible.”
Hiring a psychologist is an increasingly
popular option (see next review). But for
those willing to cheat, the obvious source
is performance-enhancing drugs. Mr Fou-
ché claims that
traditional anti-doping
tests, which examine urine samples for
banned substances, are obsolete. Just 0.5%
of the competitors at the Athletics World
Championships in 2011 failed tests; an
anonymised survey published in August
found that more than 30% of them admit-
ted to having used illegal drugs in the year
before the competition. 

1

The Economist September 9th 2017 

Books and arts 73

2

In the past decade sporting authorities
have widely adopted “athlete biological
passports”, which look for sudden changes
in the blood or urine but rarely provide 
incontrovertible proof. Evidence of how
easy it is to hoodwink them has come from
Bryan Fogel, another cyclist-turned-com-
mentator, whose documentary “Icarus”
was released by Netﬂix last month. The
ﬁlm follows the doctor who mastermind-
ed Russia’s state-sponsored steroids pro-
gramme, which was eventually busted in
2015, and shows the World Anti-Doping
Agency’s incredulity as each layer of the
deceit is gradually revealed.

Yet Mr Fouché contests the “perception
that the most prominent technoscientiﬁc
changes within sport have been pharma-
ceutical”. Much of the gain in performance
can be explained by vastly improved
equipment. Pole-vaulters are propelled by
carbon-ﬁbre rods; golf balls by titanium
clubs. The author devotes a chapter to the
body-length polyurethane suit manufac-
tured by Speedo, a swimwear company.
More than 130 world records were toppled
in the 18 months after it was launched in
February 2008. 
“Game Changer” argues that the physi-
cal diﬀerences between competitors “may

become so inﬁnitesimal that athletic per-
formance may cease to determine the out-
comes”, and thus that technological ad-
vances are gradually eroding sport’s
authenticity. The common solution has
been to prohibit them. FINA, swimming’s
governing body, banned full-length suits in
July 2009. Anti-doping, too, has been a
check on scientiﬁc enhancement. But dop-
ing is regulated with good reason. Erythro-
poietin (commonly known as EPO), a
blood-thickening drug, was linked to the
deaths of 18 cyclists in the ﬁve years after its
initial clinical trials in 1986.
Sporting administrators have to draw 

1

Johnson

Google a photoshopped hoover

Companies don’t want you to take their brand names in vain. But they can’t do much to stop you
WHAT else could you call a photo-
copier? If you answer “a Xerox
machine”, you are one of the many peo-
ple for whom the brand name and the ge-
neric item are one and the same. Like
many brands that have gone generic, xe-
rox is often lower-case and used as a verb.
There are many more of these than peo-
ple realise: aspirin was once Aspirin, a
trademark of Bayer, which was forced to
give it up as part of Germany’s repara-
tions after the ﬁrst world war.
Most “universalised” brand names are
really only regional. Visitors to the Ameri-
can South are amused to ﬁnd that its most
famous brand is used generically: “You
want a coke? We have Mountain Dew,
Sprite….” And a vacuum is universally a
hoover in Britain: look for “hoover” via a
search engine (quick, name one) in Britain
and you will be oﬀered hoovers by Dy-
son, Russell Hobbs and others besides the
eponymous company (which, though
Americans have not universalised its
brand, was founded in Ohio).
Brands go generic all around the
world. What Americans call a Kleenex,
Germans call a Tempo, and what they call
a Band-Aid is a Hansaplast in Greece and
Turkey. In Mexico or Brazil, those who
want Scotch tape (as Americans call clear
plastic tape) or Sellotape (as it’s known in
Britain) need to know to ask for Durex. But
of course Durex is better known in other
countries for making what Italians call a
Goldone—a condom.
You would think that having your
brand reach universal status would be an
occasion for champagne in the board-
room, a sign of total market domination.
You would be wrong. What linguists
sometimes call “genericisation” of brand
names has a grimmer name among mar-
keting types: “genericide”. Companies
that see their trademarks go generic may

be unable to renew them. So Google does
not want you to use the phrase “to google a
hoover”—unless you speciﬁcally mean
that you used Google’s search engine, and
not, say Bing. When the Swedish Academy
added ogooglebar to its list of new words,
meaning “unable to be found with a
search engine”, Google hassled the com-
pany to change the deﬁnition to mean “un-
able to be found with the Google search
engine”, and to include a notice that Goo-
gle was a registered trademark. The Acad-
emy dropped the word from its list instead.
That, of course, made ogooglebar a sensa-
tion. Foreign coverage of the ﬂap almost
uniformly favoured the Swedes.
Other trademark-holders are touchier
than Google. Adobe, maker of Photoshop,
publishes an elaborate list of thou-shalt
and thou-shalt-nots, even dictating the
grammatical uses of its famous trademark.
First on that list is “Trademarks are not
verbs”. The company wants you to say not

“The image was photoshopped” but “The
image was enhanced using Adobe® Pho-
toshop® software.” Adobe’s injunctions
go on to get confused. “Trademarks must
never be used in possessive form,” the list
continues, so you should not write “Pho-
toshop’s new features are impressive.”
This is presumably because Adobe be-
lieves that “Trademarks are not nouns,”
including Photoshop. But this is non-
sense: “Photoshop” is used as a noun end-
lessly on Adobe’s own website. 
Legally, Adobe’s grammatical diktats
are not worth a photoshopped image of
its CEO riding a unicorn. They are not part
of any contract, nor are they covered by
trademark law. That is about commerce,
not intellectual, public or casual speech. It
can stop you from selling image-editing
software called Photoshoppe, but not
from calling an edited image “photo-
shopped”, or even a “shoop”, as some in-
ternet denizens jokingly do.
But company lawyers have a tendency
to ﬁght harder than they need to. Siva
Vaidhyanathan of the University of Vir-
ginia writes in “Intellectual Property: A
Very Short Introduction” of a man in 1990
who ﬁled for a trademark on his red,
white and blue assortment of “Stealth
Condoms”, with the tag-phrase “They’ll
never see you coming.” Northrop, the
maker of the B-2 “stealth bomber”, sued
to stop him, claiming that the man had
purloined and even harmed the reputa-
tion of their trademark. He went bust. 
Companies have deep pockets and
can outlast opponents in a lawsuit, right
or wrong. Adobe’s rules for “Photoshop”
have no force; the instructions actually
say “you should”, not “you must”, but the
page is formatted to look intimidatingly
legal. Even without the force of law, Mr
Vaidhyanathan says, it has the same ef-
fect: “If it chills speech, it chills speech.”

74 Books and arts

The Economist September 9th 2017

2 lines somewhere. They are often blurred,
temporary and unpopular. Mr Fouché con-
siders the examples of Oscar Pistorius, an
amputee runner whose prosthetic legs
might have given him an advantage at the
Olympics, and Caster Semenya, a female
runner who was accused of being a man.
The IAAF, athletics’ governing body, al-
lowed both to compete after extensive test-
ing but left no deﬁnitive precedent for fu-
ture cases. Authorities are hasty to ban
innovations that change the balance of a
sport, and prone to dithering, as has hap-
pened with the constantly changing speci-
ﬁcations in college baseball for aluminium
bats, which give hitters more distance.
Doping policy is equally erratic. Russian
hackers have leaked hundreds of “thera-
peutic-use exemptions” (TUEs): certiﬁcates
that allow athletes to take steroids for med-
ical purposes.
With his “sporting publics” and “domi-
nant narratives”, Mr Fouché is clearly writ-
ing for academics. Casual fans will be far
more entertained by Mr Fogel’s Orwellian
tale of doping doublethink. Nonetheless,
Mr Fouché makes important points about
sport’s growing grey areas. Athletes strive
for the Olympic motto: citius, altius, fortius,
or “faster, higher, stronger”. They ought to
compete ceteris paribus—another Latin
phrase, beloved of economists, which
means “with all else being equal”. But that,
as any wily Ancient Greek wrestler could
have told you, is a fantasy. 7

Sport (2)

Help for heroes

On Form. By Mike Brearley. Little, Brown; 416
pages; £20
DURING the Australian cricket team’s
tour of England in 1981, Ian Botham
and Bob Willis were both hopelessly out
of form when the third Test match began.
They couldn’t do a thing right. Yet both
eventually produced extraordinary perfor-
mances that still seem miraculous today.
Mike Brearley, the captain, gave one of
them a robust teasing and the other gentle
encouragement; both responded in aston-
ishing fashion. This established Mr Brear-
ley’s myth as a miracle-worker, a Gandalf
ﬁgure in English cricket. Most people
would be happy with that. But now Mr
Brearley examines the question of form in
serious and exacting detail. 
He is not just writing about form in
cricket, but in “every area of life that calls
for skill and freedom”. Do not expect a sim-
ple answer, because Mr Brearley is not, in
any sense, a simple man.
He abandoned a career as a philosophy

Hit man

lecturer to play cricket for Middlesex and
went on to become a psychoanalyst: in
other words he abandoned abstract
thought to look for solutions. His own Test
match record as a batsman was, in his own
word, poor. But as he scored a century for
Middlesex against Yorkshire in 1973, he re-
alised that “being in peak form is a time not
for basking but for developing.” He ex-
plores how people can boost performance
“under the aegis of a kinder self” and
brings in a broad range of references: Tol-
stoy, Freud, Wittgenstein, Zinedine Zidane,
Dennis Lillee, Plato, Brueghel the Elder, an
India tree-surgeon called Tina, Proust,
Gramsci and a Hungarian psychologist
called Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi who spe-
cialises in studying mental focus. 
Each is taken with equal seriousness as
a source of wisdom. Cricket and philoso-
phy, literature, football and art are all, he
believes, valid pursuits that can lead peo-
ple towards a deeper and more meaning-
ful life. It comes back to psychoanalysis. Mr
Brearley was a sportsman ﬁrst, but it is
psychoanalysis that dominates his heart
and mind. For him understanding the self
is the key to absolutely everything—and it
is here that he reveals himself a golden
meanie: Captain Goldilocks trying to steer
the best route with a team and its captain. 
He chivvied his two cricketers out of
self-doubt but not into over-conﬁdence. He
writes about the balance between the
horse, representing instinct and talent, and
the snaﬄe, representing various forms of
discipline. Balance is the key, but how to
get the balance right between the individ-
ual and the team? 
Alas, there is no single answer: just a
million ways of looking for one. Unless
you are Don Bradman, the greatest cricket-
er ever to pick up a bat. When he was asked
what he did when he was out of form, he
said: “I can’t answer that…When I played, I
was never out of form.” 7

Fiction

Irish song

Solar Bones. By Mike McCormack. Soho
Press; 224 pages; $25. Canongate; £20
THE Angelus bell rings out on the ﬁrst
page of Mike McCormack’s novel,
“Solar Bones”. It is the Catholic devotion
that commemorates the mystery of the
Incarnation. That mystery, the idea of a
spirit made ﬂesh, haunts this remarkable
book. Taking place in the course of an
hour on All Souls’ Day, when the dead
return to walk the Earth, and set in the
stark, lovely landscape of County Mayo
on Ireland’s west coast, it is a story told in
one single running sentence. It is broken
by breath and by paragraph indentation,
but never by the full stop of ﬁnality. Yet it
would be quite possible to be swept into
this book’s homely, poetic narrative and
not notice this device at all. 
Mr McCormack is a well-established
writer in his native Ireland. But it was
only when “Solar Bones”, brought out in
the ﬁrst instance by Tramp Press—a three-
year-old independent publisher based in
Dublin—won the Goldsmiths prize last
year that the book gained wider recogni-
tion. The novel has now been longlisted
for the 2017 Man Booker prize and is
about to be published in America. The
Goldsmiths prize rewards ﬁction which
pushes against the bounds of conven-
tion, and this novel ﬁts that bill, though
its artiﬁce is subtle and natural. 
Its narrator is Marcus Conway, a civil
engineer of a very ordinary kind: no
grand structures for him, but simply the
highways and buildings of his Mayo
home. And yet he is still concerned
“with scale and accuracy, mapping and
surveying so that the grid of reason and
progress could be laid across the earth,
gathering its wildness into towns and
villages by way of bridges and roads and
water schemes and power lines”. 
These serial commas are the mark of
the novel, whether its narrator considers
his work—a topic that is all too rarely
covered in 20th- and 21st-century ﬁc-
tion—or his love for his wife Mairead,
and their grown son and daughter. Even
illness and suﬀering can be rendered
beautiful by close observation, by the
tenderness of aﬀection. Marcus’s life is
an ordinary one in much the way that
the life of Leopold Bloom, his literary
predecessor, is ordinary. It is the vivid
attention to detail, both in “Ulysses”,
James Joyce’s masterpiece, and in “Solar
Bones”, which make both these novels
resonate like that evening bell. 

Appointments

75

 Business & Personal

Tenders

FX & Gaming Licenses
Swedish Trusts
Payment Processing Systems
Offshore Banks
Instant Citizenships & Residencies

www.global-money.com
www.gmccitizenships.com

To advertise within the classified section, contact:

UK/Europe
Agne Zurauskaite
Tel: +44 20 7576 8152 
agnezurauskaite@economist.com

United States
Richard Dexter
Tel: +1 212 554 0662 
richarddexter@economist.com

Asia
Shan Shan Teo
Tel: +65 6428 2673 
shanshanteo@economist.com

Middle East & Africa
Philip Wrigley
Tel: +44 20 7576 8091 
philipwrigley@economist.com

The Economist September 9th 2017

Readers are recommended

to make appropriate enquiries and take appropriate advice before sending money, incurring any expense or 
entering into a binding commitment in relation to an advertisement .
The Economist Newspaper Limited shall not be liable to any person for loss or damage incurred or suffered as a 
result of his/her accepting or offering to accept an invitation contained in any advertisement published in
The Economist .

76

Economic and ﬁnancial indicators

The Economist September 9th 2017

Economic data

Gross domestic product 

Industr ial 
production 

Consumer pr ices Unemployment 
rate, % 

Current-account balance 

Currency units, per $

Statistics on 42
economies plus
our monthly poll
of forecasters

Economic data

% change on year ago

latest 

+6.9 Q2 
+2.0 Q2 
+1.7 Q2 
+3.7 Q2 
+2.2 Q2 
+2.2 Q2 
+1.5 Q2 
+1.7 Q2 
+2.1 Q2 
+0.7 Q2 
+1.5 Q2 
+3.3 Q2 
+3.1 Q2 

United States +2.2 Q2 
China 
Japan 
Br itain 
Canada 
Euro area 
Austr ia 
Belgium 
France 
Germany 
Greece 
Italy 
Netherlands 
Spain 
Czech Republic +3.4 Q2 
Denmark 
Norway 
Poland 
Russia 
Sweden  
Switzerland 
Turkey 
Australia 
Hong Kong 
India 
Indonesia 
Malaysia 
Pakistan 
Philippines 
Singapore 
South Korea 
Taiwan 
Thailand 
Argentina 
Brazil 
Chile 
Colombia 
Mexico 
Venezuela 
Egypt 
Israel 
Saudi Arabia 
South Afr ica 

+1.9 Q2 
+0.2 Q2 
+4.6 Q2 
+2.5 Q2 
+3.9 Q2 
+0.3 Q2 
+5.0 Q1 
+1.8 Q2 
+3.8 Q2 
+5.7 Q2 
+5.0 Q2 
+5.8 Q2 

+6.5 Q2 
+2.9 Q2 
+2.7 Q2 
+2.1 Q2 
+3.7 Q2 
+0.3 Q1 
+0.3 Q2 
+0.9 Q2 
+1.3 Q2 
+1.8 Q2 
-8.8 Q4~ 
+4.3 Q1 
+4.0 Q2 
+1.7 2016 
+1.1 Q2 

+5.7 2017** 

qtr* 2017† 
+3.0 
+2.1 
+7.0 +6.8 
+4.0 
+1.6 
+1.2 
+1.5 
+4.5 +2.6 
+2.5 +2.0 
-1.0 +2.2 
+1.7 
+1.7 
+1.9 
+1.6 
+2.5 
+2.1 
+2.2 
+1.0 
+1.5 
+1.3 
+6.2 +2.6 
+3.5 
+3.1 
+10.3 +4.5 
+2.5 +2.0 
+4.7 
+1.9 
+4.5 +3.7 
na 
+1.7 
+7.1 
+3.1 
+1.1 
+1.3 
na +4.0 
+3.3 +2.3 
+4.1 
+3.1 
+4.1 
+7.0 
na +5.2 
na +5.2 
na +5.7 
+7.0 +6.5 
+2.2 +2.9 
+2.4 +2.9 
+0.5 +2.3 
+5.4 +3.3 
+4.3 +2.6 
+1.0 +0.6 
+3.0 
+1.2 
+3.0 
+1.7 
+2.3 
+2.1 
-6.2 
-9.0 
na +3.7 
+2.7 +3.5 
na 
-0.5 
+2.5 +0.6 

latest 
latest 
2017† 
+2.2 Jul 
+1.7 Jul 
+1.9 
+6.4 Jul 
+1.4 Jul 
+1.8 
+4.7 Jul 
+0.5 Jul 
+0.5 
+0.3 Jun 
+2.6 Jul 
+2.7 
+10.0 Jun 
+1.2 Jul 
+1.7 
+2.6 Jun 
+1.5 Aug 
+1.5 
+4.5 Jun 
+2.0 Jul 
+1.9 
+4.0 Jun 
+1.9 Aug 
+2.1 
+2.6 Jun 
+0.9 Aug 
+1.2 
+2.5 Jun 
+1.8 Aug 
+1.6 
+1.6 Jun 
+1.0 Jul 
+1.3 
+5.3 Jun 
+1.2 Aug 
+1.3 
+3.3 Jun 
+1.3 Jul 
+1.2 
+3.4 Jun 
+1.6 Aug 
+1.9 
+3.2 Jul 
+2.5 Jul 
+2.4 
+2.3 Jun 
+1.5 Jul 
+0.9 
+2.8 Jun 
+1.5 Jul 
+2.1 
+6.3 Jul 
+1.8 Aug 
+1.8 
+1.0 Jul 
+3.3 Aug 
+4.2 
+5.3 Jul 
+2.2 Jul 
+1.7 
+2.9 Q2 
+0.5 Aug 
+0.5 
-3.6 Jun +10.7 Aug +10.3 
+0.8 Q2 
+1.9 Q2 
+2.1 
+0.2 Q1 
+1.9 Jul 
+1.6 
-0.1 Jun 
+2.4 Jul 
+3.6 
-1.4 Jun 
+3.8 Aug 
+4.2 
+4.0 Jun 
+3.2 Jul 
+3.9 
+3.5 Jun 
+3.4 Aug 
+4.2 
+8.1 Jun 
+3.1 Aug 
+3.0 
+21.0 Jul 
+0.6 Jul 
+0.9 
+0.1 Jul 
+2.6 Aug 
+1.9 
+2.4 Jul 
+1.0 Aug 
+0.5 
+3.7 Jul 
+0.3 Aug 
+0.8 
-2.5 Oct +21.5 Jul‡ +24.6 
+2.5 Jul 
+2.5 Aug 
+3.7 
+3.3 Jul 
+1.7 Jul 
+2.4 
-1.9 Jun 
+3.9 Aug 
+4.0 
-0.3 Jun 
+6.4 Jul 
+5.8 
+0.8 Sep 
na  
+667 
+33.0 Jun +33.0 Jul 
+22.8 
+0.9 Jun 
-0.7 Jul 
+0.4 
na  
-0.3 Jul 
+1.1 
-2.7 Jun 
+4.6 Jul 
+5.3 

latest 12 
months, $bn 
-449.3 Q1 
+157.3 Q2 
+187.8 Jun 
-99.8 Q1 
-45.0 Q2 
+372.7 Jun 
+6.4 Q1 
-4.2 Mar 
-25.3 Jun 
+270.6 Jun 
-1.0 Jun 
+50.3 Jun 
+68.4 Q1 
+21.2 Jun 
+1.4 Q1 
+26.4 Jun 
+16.6 Q2 
-2.5 Jun 
+33.6 Q2 
+22.5 Q2 
+73.6 Q1 
-34.3 Jun 
-21.8 Q2 
+14.9 Q1 
-15.2 Q1 
-14.2 Q2 
+8.1 Q2 
-12.1 Q2 
-0.4 Mar 
+59.0 Q2 
+82.1 Jul 
+70.7 Q2 
+44.9 Q2 
-16.8 Q1 
-13.8 Jul 
-5.6 Q2 
-11.9 Q1 
-17.6 Q2 
-17.8 Q3~ 
-18.0 Q1 
+11.7 Q1 
-1.0 Q1 
-7.9 Q1 

% of GDP 
2017† 
-2.4 
+1.5 
+3.6 
-3.4 
-2.6 
+3.2 
+2.1 
+0.7 
-1.2 
+8.0 
-1.3 
+2.4 
+9.9 
+1.5 
+0.9 
+8.2 
+7.0 
-0.4 
+2.7 
+4.5 
+9.6 
-4.4 
-1.4 
+4.1 
-1.2 
-1.7 
+2.2 
-3.8 
+0.3 
+18.4 
+5.6 
+12.6 
+11.9 
-3.3 
-0.8 
-1.9 
-3.7 
-1.9 
-1.1 
-5.9 
+4.1 
+0.5 
-3.2 

4.4 Aug 
4.0 Q2§ 
2.8 Jul 

4.4 May†† 

6.3 Jul 
9.1 Jul 
5.4 Jul 
7.6 Mar 
9.8 Jul 

3.7 Jul‡ 

21.7 May 
11.3 Jul 
6.0 Jul 
17.1 Jul 

2.9 Jul‡ 

4.3 Jun 

4.3 Jun‡‡ 
7.1 Aug§ 
5.1 Jul§ 
6.6 Jul§ 

3.2 Jul 
10.2 May§ 
5.7 Jul 

3.1 Jul‡‡ 
5.0 2015 

5.3 Q1§ 

3.4 Jun§ 
5.9 2015 

5.7 Q2§ 
2.2 Q2 

3.5 Jul§ 

3.8 Jul 

1.2 Jul§ 

9.2 Q1§ 
12.8 Jul§ 

6.9 Jul§‡‡ 
9.7 Jul§ 

3.2 Jul 

7.3 Apr§ 

12.0 Q2§ 
4.1 Jul 

5.6 2016 

27.7 Q2§ 

Budget 
balance 

Interest
rates, %

% of GDP 10-year gov't 
2017† 
bonds, latest 
-3.4 
2.08 
-3.9 
3.64§§ 
-4.5 
nil 
-3.6 
1.09 
-2.1 
1.95 
-1.3 
0.36 
-1.0 
0.57 
-2.1 
0.68 
-3.1 
0.65 
+0.7 
0.36 
-1.4 
5.50 
-2.3 
2.02 
+0.6 
0.47 
-3.3 
1.53 
-0.1 
0.89 
-0.6 
0.49 
+4.2 
1.56 
-2.2 
3.19 
-2.1 
8.13 
+0.3 
0.61 
+0.2 
-0.12 
-2.0 
10.72 
-1.8 
2.55 
+1.0 
1.42 
-3.2 
6.51 
-2.4 
6.64 
-3.0 
3.88 
-4.5 
8.10††† 
-2.8 
4.57 
-1.0 
1.99 
+0.9 
2.28 
+0.2 
1.00 
-2.5 
2.13 
-6.1 
na 
-8.1 
8.84 
-3.0 
4.32 
-3.3 
6.72 
-1.9 
6.86 
-19.5 
10.08 
-10.8 
na 
-2.6 
1.70 
-8.2 
3.68 
-3.2 
8.43 

Sep 6th 
- 
6.52 
109 
0.77 
1.22 
0.84 
0.84 
0.84 
0.84 
0.84 
0.84 
0.84 
0.84 
0.84 
21.9 
6.23 
7.77 
3.56 
57.4 
7.95 
0.95 
3.43 
1.25 
7.83 
64.1 
13,333 
4.24 
105 
51.1 
1.35 
1,136 
30.1 
33.1 
17.2 
3.12 
620 
2,921 
17.8 
10.1 
17.6 
3.55 
3.75 
12.8 

year ago
-
6.68
102
0.74
1.28
0.89
0.89
0.89
0.89
0.89
0.89
0.89
0.89
0.89
24.0
6.62
8.19
3.86
64.6
8.47
0.97
2.93
1.30
7.76
66.5
13,127
4.08
105
46.6
1.35
1,105
31.4
34.7
15.0
3.24
666
2,890
18.4
9.99
8.88
3.75
3.75
14.1

Source: Haver Analytics.  *% change on previous quar ter, annual rate. †The Economist poll or Economist Intelligence Unit estimate/forecast. §Not seasonally adjusted. ‡New ser ies. ~2014 **Year ending June. ††Latest 
3 months. ‡‡3-month moving average. §§5-year yield. †††Dollar-denominated bonds. 

 
 
 
 
The Economist September 9th 2017 

Economic and ﬁnancial indicators 77

Markets

Index 

Markets

% change on
Dec 30th 2016
one 
in local 
in $
Sep 6th week currency terms
21,807.6 
-0.4 
+10.3 +10.3
3,545.5 
+0.6 
+9.1 +15.7
19,358.0 
-0.8 
+1.3 
+8.5
7,354.1 
-0.2 
+3.0 
+8.6
15,059.8 
-0.5 
-1.5 
+7.0
+0.9 
+5.9 +19.8
+0.9 
+4.4 +18.0
3,219.0 
+0.5 
+22.9 +39.0
3,890.6 
+0.4 
+7.9 +21.9
5,101.4 
+0.9 
+4.9 +18.6
12,214.5 
+1.8 
+6.4 +20.3
811.7 
-1.5 
+26.1 +42.6
21,814.6 
+1.4 
+13.4 +28.2
516.5 
+0.7 
+6.9 +20.8
1,021.2 
-1.0 
+8.2 +22.3
1,025.0 
-0.4 
+11.2 +30.2
914.7 
+0.2 
+14.5 +29.4
37,878.9 
-0.1 
+18.4 +35.1
819.3 
+1.9 
+7.2 +18.8
64,768.3 
-0.3 
+25.1 +46.9
1,106.7 
+2.1 
-4.0 
-4.0
1,541.3 
+0.3 
+1.6 +15.9
8,859.5 
+0.1 
+7.8 +14.6
109,611.8 
-0.7 
+40.3 +44.0
5,752.9 
+0.3 
+0.6 +11.5
27,613.8 
-1.7 
+25.5 +24.4
31,662.0 
nil 
+18.9 +25.9
5,824.1 
-0.8 
+10.0 
+11.1
1,772.5 
nil 
+8.0 +13.7
41,390.0 
+0.2 
-13.4 
-14.2
3,232.5 
-1.0 
+12.2 +19.9
2,319.8 
-2.2 
+14.5 +22.2
10,547.9 
-0.2 
+14.0 +22.2
1,621.3 
+0.5 
+5.1 +13.4
24,164.9 
+2.9 
+42.8 +30.9
73,412.4 
+3.6 
+21.9 
+27.2
25,416.5 
-1.2 
+22.6 +32.2
11,281.8 
+3.7 
+11.6 +14.8
50,515.6 
-1.3 
+10.7 +28.1
266,926.1 +18.4 
+742 
na
13,317.9 
-0.7 
+7.9 +10.9
1,265.7 
+0.3 
-0.9 
+7.0
7,306.1 
+0.7 
+0.9 
+1.0
55,480.2 
-1.2 
+9.5 +16.2

United States (DJIA) 
China (SSEA) 
Japan (Nikkei 225) 
Br itain (FTSE 100) 
Canada (S&P TSX) 
Euro area (FTSE Euro 100) 1,178.2 
Euro area (EURO STOXX 50) 3,433.8 
Austr ia (ATX) 
Belgium (Bel 20) 
France (CAC 40) 
Germany (DAX)* 
Greece (Athex Comp) 
Italy (FTSE/MIB) 
Netherlands (AEX) 
Spain (Madr id SE) 
Czech Republic (PX) 
Denmark (OMXCB) 
Hungary (BUX) 
Norway (OSEAX) 
Poland (WIG) 
Russia (RTS, $ terms) 
Sweden (OMXS30) 
Switzerland (SMI) 
Turkey (BIST) 
Australia (All Ord.) 
Hong Kong (Hang Seng) 
India (BSE) 
Indonesia (JSX) 
Malaysia (KLSE) 
Pakistan (KSE) 
Singapore (STI) 
South Korea (KOSPI) 
Taiwan (TWI)  
Thailand (SET) 
Argentina (MERV) 
Brazil (BVSP) 
Chile (IGPA) 
Colombia (IGBC) 
Mexico (IPC) 
Venezuela (IBC) 
Egypt (EGX 30) 
Israel (TA-125) 
Saudi Arabia (Tadawul) 
South Afr ica (JSE AS) 

The Economist poll of forecasters, September averages (previous month’s, if changed)

Real GDP, % change 
Low/high range 
average 
2017 
2018 
2017 
2018 
2.0 / 2.8 2.4 / 3.2 
2.3  
2.7 (2.8) 
0.2 / 1.2 1.5 / 3.1 
0.6 (0.5) 
2.1  
1.4 / 1.7 0.7 / 1.7 
1.5  
1.3 (1.2) 
1.7 / 3.1 1.5 / 2.4 
2.6 (2.4) 
2.0  
6.7 / 6.9 6.3 / 6.9 
6.8 (6.7) 
6.5 (6.3) 
1.4 / 1.8 1.5 / 1.9 
1.6 (1.5) 
1.7  
1.8 / 2.3 1.5 / 2.4 
2.1 (1.9) 
1.9 (1.8) 
6.4 / 7.5 
7.0 / 7.9 
7.0 (7.1) 
7.5 (7.6) 
1.2 / 1.5 0.9 / 1.5 
1.3 (1.2) 
1.1 (1.0) 
1.2 / 2.0 0.6 / 2.0 
1.6 (1.4) 
1.3 (1.1) 
1.3 / 2.0 1.4 / 3.3 
1.7 (1.5) 
1.9 (1.7) 
2.9 / 3.2 2.3 / 2.9 
3.1 (3.0) 
2.7 (2.5) 
United States 2.0 / 2.3 1.9 / 2.9 
2.1 (2.2) 
2.3  
1.9 / 2.2 1.6 / 2.2 
2.0  
1.8  

Australia 
Brazil 
Br itain 
Canada 
China 
France 
Germany 
India 
Italy 
Japan 
Russia 
Spain 

Euro area 

Consumer pr ices 
% change 
2017 
2018 
2.1 (2.2) 2.3  
3.7 (3.8) 4.2 (4.3) 
2.7  
2.6 (2.7) 
1.7 (1.8) 1.8 (1.9) 
1.8 (1.9) 2.2 (2.3) 
1.2  
1.2  
1.6  
1.5  
3.6 (3.9) 4.4 (4.6) 
1.3  
1.1  
0.5 (0.6) 0.8 (0.9) 
4.2 (4.1) 4.2 (4.1) 
1.9  
1.3 (1.4) 
1.9  
2.0  
1.5  
1.3  

Current account
% of GDP
2017 
2018
-1.4 (-1.5) -2.1 
-0.8 (-1.0) -1.4 
-3.4  
-3.0 (-2.9)
-2.6  
-2.3 
1.5 (1.6) 
1.5 (1.6)
-1.2 (-1.3) -1.1 
8.0  
7.6 
-1.2 (-1.1) -1.5 
2.4 (2.1) 
2.1 (1.8)
3.6  
3.6 
2.7 (2.5) 
2.1 (2.2)
1.5 (1.7) 
1.7 (1.6)
-2.4 (-2.5) -2.5 (-2.6)
3.2  
3.1 (3.0)

Sources: Bank of Amer ica, Barclays, BNP Par ibas, Citigroup, Commerzbank, Credit Suisse, Decision Economics, Deutsche Bank, 
EIU, Goldman Sachs, HSBC Secur ities, ING, Itaú BBA, JPMorgan, Morgan Stanley, Nomura, RBS, Royal Bank of Canada, Schroders, 
Scotiabank, Société Générale, Standard Char tered, UBS.  For more countr ies, go to: Economist.com/markets

Other markets

Other markets

Index 

347.8 
1,592.0 

% change on
Dec 30th 2016
one 
in local 
in $
Sep 6th week currency terms
2,465.5 
+0.3 
+10.1 
+10.1
+0.4 
+18.8 +18.8
+1.2 
+1.8 
+1.8
-1.0 
+4.8 +12.3
+0.8 
+2.9 +16.3
+0.6 
+11.9 +11.9
-0.4 
+25.6 +25.6
478.0 
+0.5 
+13.3 +13.3
957.8 
+0.7 
+8.4 
+8.4
842.3 
+0.5 
+9.1 
+9.1
1,250.1§ 
+0.4 
+3.9 
+3.9
11.6 +11.2 
+14.0 (levels)
54.5 
-3.4 
-24.4 
-14.6
59.2 
-0.2 
-12.7 
-12.7
6.7 +13.0 
+2.0 +15.3

United States (S&P 500) 
United States (NAScomp) 6,393.3 
China (SSEB, $ terms) 
Japan (Topix) 
Europe (FTSEurof irst 300) 1,469.8 
World, dev'd (MSCI) 
Emerging markets (MSCI) 1,083.2 
World, all (MSCI) 
World bonds (Citigroup) 
EMBI+ (JPMorgan) 
Hedge funds (HFRX) 
Volatility, US (VIX) 
CDSs, Eur (iTRAXX)† 
CDSs, N Am (CDX)† 
Carbon trading (EU ETS) € 

1,959.1 

Sources: IHS Markit; Thomson Reuters.  *Total return index. 
†Credit-default-swap spreads, basis points. §Sep 5th.

Indicators for more countr ies and additional
Indicators for more countr ies and additional

ser ies, go to: Economist.com/indicators
ser ies, go to: Economist.com/indicators

Dollar Index

All Items 
Food 
Industr ials 
 All 
 Nfa† 
 Metals 

Sterling Index

All items 

Euro Index

All items 

Gold

$ per oz 

West Texas Intermediate

$ per barrel 

46.4 

48.7 

-1.0 

+8.5

Sources: Bloomberg; CME Group; Cotlook; Darmenn & Curl; FT; ICCO;
ICO; ISO; Live Rice Index; LME; NZ Wool Ser vices; Thompson Lloyd & 
Ewar t; Thomson Reuters; Urner Barr y; WSJ.  *Provisional  
†Non-food agr iculturals.

The Economist commodity-pr ice index

2005=100

The Economist commodity-price index

% change on
one 
one
Sep 5th* month 
year

Aug 29th 

144.9 
145.9 

143.9 
132.9 
148.6 

147.4 
148.6 

146.1 
135.8 
150.5 

+1.4 
-3.0 

+6.6 
+4.6 
+7.4 

+9.5
-3.4

+27.6
+9.9
+36.0

203.6 

205.7 

+0.9 

+12.9

149.9 

153.7 

-0.1 

+3.2

1,270.2 

1,336.5 

+6.5 

-0.3

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
78

Obituar y Richard Gregor y

Barbed humour

the gags improved, polished hard when a
far-sighted oﬃcer assigned him to army en-
tertainment during his military service.
So he pushed the Playboy Club manag-
er aside and walked on stage. He greeted
the instant catcall of “Nigger” warmly,
claiming (ﬁctitiously) that each such insult
earned him a $50 bonus. And his nearby
restaurant had the same name, so the pub-
licity was especially welcome.

Richard “Dick” Gregory, an American comedian, dietician and civil-rights
campaigner, died on August 19th, aged 84 
RACISM is no laughing matter. But ridi-
cule can erode it. Until Dick Gregory
broke into the mainstream, American
black comedians had only two choices,
playing to black audiences, or being the
butt of white performers’ jokes. 
That changed at the Playboy Club in
Chicago in January 1961. The young man
took the wrong bus, and ran 20 blocks in
shoes cold-proofed with cardboard to get
to his ﬁrst big break, only to be told to col-
lect his fee and go. The audience was a con-
vention-load of
frozen-food 
industry
types: male, Southern and white. An uppi-
ty black man would be jeered, or worse. 
But he was well prepared. A jealous red-
neck kicked in his front teeth when he was
nine, as punishment for merely touching a
white woman’s leg as he shined her shoes.
His mother, a hardworking housemaid,
kept the vital family telephone hidden in a
cupboard: welfare cases weren’t allowed
such luxuries. But amid the hunger and hu-
miliation, she had taught young Dick that
laughing was a better way out of diﬃculty
than crying. Once a man laughs with you,
he can’t laugh at you. 
His early wisecracks were lame and
desperate. His bed was so crowded that he
needed a bookmark to keep his place
when he got up to pee. His home was so
poor that the rats slept six to a bed too. But

The power of laughter
That cracked the ice for the rest of his wry,
self-deprecating routine. “A white waitress
told me: ‘We don’t serve coloured people
here.’ I told her: ‘That’s all right, I don’t eat
coloured people. Bring me a whole fried
chicken.’ Three white boys—Klu, Kluck and
Klan—said, ‘Boy, we’re giving you fair
warning. Anything you do to that chicken,
we’re gonna do to you.’ So I picked up that
chicken and I kissed it.”
The planned 50-minute gig lasted twice
as long, ending with an ovation and a
three-year contract. “From that moment on
the Jim Crow school of humour was dead,”
Newsweek wrote. Mr Gregory played the
same trick with “Nigger”, his autobiogra-
phy, which in 1964 earned him a whopping
$200,000 advance. He dismissed his
mother’s objections to the title: “Whenev-
er you hear that word, you’ll know they’re

The Economist September 9th 2017

advertising my book.” He hated the “N-
word” euphemism, arguing “let’s pull it
out of the closet, let’s lay it out there, let’s
deal with it, let’s dissect it”. 
Stardom came only on his own terms.
He declined repeated invitations to appear
on the “Tonight” show, then the peak of
American television fame, where blacks
were expected to perform standing and
leave promptly. He insisted on being al-
lowed to sit, and chat with the host. His fee
soared from $250 a week to $5,000 a night. 
But his “monster”, as he called his inner
ﬂame, led him elsewhere, to civil-rights
marches and demonstrations. He made
light of the jailings and beatings, which
paled against the suﬀering of others: “You
ain’t never seen nothing in your life until
you see a ﬁve-year kid get hit by a grown
man with a brick.” He did not care that
protesting derailed his career. Humour
was no more going to solve the country’s
race problems than it could cure cancer. 
He decried bigots as “Whitey” while in-
sisting that the struggle was not black
against white, but right against wrong. For
all America’s evils and faults, “you can still
reach through the forest and see the sun.
But we don’t know yet whether that sun is
rising or setting for our country.”
His later political career was notable in
its ambitions, though scanty in its achieve-
ments. He ran against Richard Daley for
mayor of Chicago in 1967, and a year later
as a write-in presidential candidate. A for-
mer college athletics star, he became gro-
tesquely fat, until he adopted hunger
strikes as a weapon of protest. The ﬁrst was
against the Vietnam war (he shunned solid
food for 30 months). His later fasts related
to causes ranging from apartheid to the
Equal Rights Amendment, drug abuse, Na-
tive American rights, nuclear power, police
brutality, prison reform, the hostages in
Iran—and Michael Jackson’s innocence on
child-abuse charges. 
A newfound vegetarianism became a
crusade and then a business, with clients
including John Lennon and Muhammad
Ali. The treatments were unorthodox, in-
volving copious draughts of vegetable
juice and thrice-weekly enemas. His diet
drinks were proﬁtable rot too, but at least
the other advice—a daily mile-long walk,
and a single balanced evening meal—was
beneﬁcial. He treated his own cancer with
diet, herbs and mysterious gadgets, gloat-
ing when it went into remission.
The crankery extended to conspiracy
theories, of varying merits. He co-authored
a book suggesting FBI complicity in the
murder of his friend Martin Luther King.
He also believed the Moon landings were
faked, as were the oﬃcial accounts of the
crack cocaine epidemic and the terrorist at-
tacks of September 11th 2001. Disarming
the powerful with laughter was one thing.
Trusting their truthfulness was another. 7

Augment your reality.

In a fast-changing world,
(cid:31) nd your own perspective on global a(cid:30) airs.

SUBSCR IBERS EN JOY:

Espresso

Yet to subscribe? Visit Economist .com/getahead to view our student and regular subscription o(cid:31) ers . 
Get star ted with our introductory o(cid:31) er and receive a free copy of Megatech: Technology in 2050.

Tambour Hor izon

Your journey, connec ted .

m

o

c

.

n
o

t
t
i

u
v
s

i

u
o

l

