France’s dangerous election

Theresa May goes for June

What Europe can teach America’s airlines 

When crayfish get drunk

APRIL 22ND– 28TH 2017

Handle with 
extreme care

Contents

The Economist Apr il 22nd 2017 3

5 The world this week

Leaders
7 North Korea

Handle with extreme care

8 The French election

Time to decide

9 Islam in Indonesia

The r ise of intolerance

9 Airlines in Amer ica

Whack-a-passenger

10 Corporate-bond markets

Broken dealers

11 Br itain’s election

Game change

Letters
12 On trade, horses, legal
aid, science, pronouns,
United Airlines

Br ieﬁng
15 The French election

La Lutte

Asia
19 North Korea

Strategic confusion

20 The race for governor
of Jakarta

Division in diversity

21 A lynching in Pakistan

Intolerance at university

21 Vietnamese diplomacy

Dock and cover

22 State power in Japan

Nabbing imaginar y
terror ists

24 Banyan

Asia’s migrating birds

China
25 Climate change

Taking the lead

26 Bicycle shar ing

The return of pedal power

United States
27 The death penalty

And then there were none

28 Georgia’s special election

Ossoﬀ’s face-oﬀ

30 The border barr ier

Backs to the wall

30 Immigrants and deﬁcits

Neither burdens nor
saviours

31 Post oﬃce v pooches

Leash the hounds

32 Health-care costs

An arm and a leg

32 Chicago shr inks again

Out of the frozen nor th

33 Lexington

Amer ica, Canada and
refugees

The Amer icas
34 Brazil

Justice Fachin’s list

35 Mexico

The long arm of the policía

35 Argentina’s ﬂag

Two shades of blue

36 Bello

Chile in a Spanish mirror

Middle East and Afr ica
37 Afr ica’s slums

The great urban racket

38 Namibia’s economy

Will it be NEEEFcapped?

39 Alger ia

Stability and stagnation

40 Gaza

Hamas divided

40 Islam’s fashions

Don’t say sexy

Special report: Asian
geopolitics
Disorder under heaven

Af ter page 40

Europe
41 Turkey’s referendum

One-man show

42 Protests in French Guiana

Failure to launch

42 McJobs in the south

Insiders v temps

43 Energy in Ireland

Bog down, wind up

44 Charlemagne

Mar tin Schulz in the
shadow of Willy Brandt

On the cover
How Donald Trump should
approach North Korea, the
world’s most dangerous
regime: leader, page 7.
Amer ica stokes tensions on
the Korean peninsula, then
tr ies to dampen them again,
page 19. A special report on
Asian geopolitics, after 
page 40

The Economist online

Daily analysis and opinion to
supplement the pr int edition, plus
audio and video, and a daily char t
Economist.com
E-mail: newsletters and
mobile edition
Economist.com/email
Pr int edition: available online by
7pm London time each Thursday
Economist.com/pr int
Audio edition: available online 
to download each Fr iday
Economist.com/audioedition

Volume 423 Number 9037

Published since September 1843

to take par t in "a severe contest between 
intelligence, which presses forward, and 
an unwor thy, timid ignorance obstructing 
our progress."

Editorial oﬃces in London and also:

Atlanta, Beijing, Berlin, Brussels, Cairo, Chicago,
Lima, Mexico City, Moscow, Mumbai, Nairobi, 
New Delhi, New York, Par is, San Francisco, 
São Paulo, Seoul, Shanghai, Singapore, Tokyo,
Washington DC

French election As it goes to

the polls, France faces the
most consequential choice in
decades—and the most
uncer tain: leader, page 8. The
stakes surrounding this vote
are higher than at any time in
recent histor y, pages 15-18

Br itain goes to the polls An

election gives Theresa May the
hope of a far larger major ity. It
also oﬀers the chance of a
better Brexit: leader, page 11.
The pr ime minister astonished
ever ybody by calling for a snap
general election on June 8th,
page 45. Her vision for Br itain
is slowly coming into focus:
Bagehot, page 48

Death penalty in Amer ica

A bid to execute a group of
pr isoners at unprecedented
speed underlines the diﬃculty
of executing anyone at all,
page 27

1

Contents continues overleaf

4 Contents

The Economist Apr il 22nd 2017

65 Paying for infrastructure

Pr ivate matters

66 Crossrail

The skeleton crew

67 Free exchange

Comparative advantage

Science and technology
68 Cloning voices

You took the words r ight
out of my mouth

69 Clear ing landmines

Illuminating the target

69 The pr ice of secrecy

Weighing heavy on the soul

70 Inebr iation

Frat-boy crayﬁsh

Books and arts
71 Nadeem Aslam

His ﬁnest novel

72 Dos Passos and
Hemingway

The winds of war

72 Studying wine

Smelling lessons

73 Argentina eco-horror

Fevered dreams

73 “The Handmaid’s Tale”

Dystopian television

76 Economic and ﬁnancial
indicators

Statistics on 42 economies,
plus a closer look at
Japan’s economy

Obituar y
78 Yevgeny Yevtushenko

More than a poet

Br itain
45 A snap election

Back into battle

46 The class of 2017

One of us?

46 The Liberal Democrats

A Brexit bounce

47 Labour

Love’s lost

48 Bagehot

Theresa May, Tor y of Tor ies

International
49 Tropical diseases

Winning the endgame

Business
53 China’s internet giants

Three kingdoms, two
empires

54 AkzoNobel

The varnished truth

55 Trump and tour ism

Staying away

56 Recreational vehicles

On the road

56 Fast food in Japan

Feeling sandwiched

58 Internet regulation

Reload

60 Schumpeter

Listed ﬁrms in Amer ica

Finance and economics
61 Corporate-bond markets

Click to trade

62 Buttonwood

Markets and democracy

63 Sugar in the EU

A sweet deal

63 Amer ican banks

Happy returns

64 World Economic Outlook

Hope spr ings

Corporate bonds The market is

shockingly archaic. Time to
br ing it into the 21st centur y:
leader, page 10. How
digitisation is revamping
trading methods, page 61

Chinese internet ﬁrms Three

giants battle at home and
abroad, page 53

Neglected tropical diseases

The remarkable tale of the
global oﬀensive against a
var iety of ancient plagues,
page 49

Drunken crayﬁsh Crustaceans

may help researchers
understand drunkenness,
page 70

Subscription service

For our full range of subscription offers, 
including digital only or print and digital 
combined visit
Economist.com/offers
You can subscribe or renew your subscription 
by mail, telephone or fax at the details below:
Telephone: +65 6534 5166 
Facsimile: +65 6534 5066
Web: 
Economist.com/offers
E-mail: 
Post: 

Asia@subscriptions.economist.com

The Economist 
Subscription Centre,
Tanjong Pagar Post Office
PO Box 671
Singapore 910817 

Subscription for 1 year (51 issues)Print only

Australia 
China 
Hong Kong & Macau 
India 
Japan 
Korea 
Malaysia 
New Zealand 
Singapore & Brunei 
Taiwan 
Thailand 
Other countries 

A$465
CNY 2,300
HK$2,300
 10,000
Yen 44,300
KRW 375,000
RM 780
NZ$530
S$425
NT$9,000
US$300
Contact us as above

Pr incipal commercial oﬃces:

25 St James’s Street, London sw1a 1hg
Tel: +44 20 7830 7000
Rue de l’Athénée 32
1206 Geneva, Switzerland
Tel: +41 22 566 2470 
750 3rd Avenue, 5th Floor, New York, NY 10017 
Tel: +1 212 541 0500 
1301 Cityplaza Four,
12 Taikoo Wan Road, Taikoo Shing, Hong Kong
Tel: +852 2585 3888

Other commercial oﬃces:

Chicago, Dubai, Frankfur t, Los Angeles,
Par is, San Francisco and Singapore 

PEFC certiﬁed
This copy of The Economist
is pr inted on paper sourced
from sustainably managed
forests, recycled and controlled
sources cer tiﬁed by PEFC
www.pefc.org

PEFC/01-31-162

© 2017 The Economist Newspaper Limited. All r ights reser ved. Neither this publication nor any par t of it may be reproduced, stored in a retr ieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or
otherwise, without the pr ior permission of The Economist Newspaper Limited. Published ever y week, except for a year-end double issue, by The Economist Newspaper Limited. The Economist is a registered trademark of The Economist Newspaper Limited.
Publisher: The Economist. Pr inted by Times Pr inters (in Singapore).
M.C.I. (P) No.030/09/2016 PPS 677/11/2012(022861)

 
 
 
 
The world this week

The Economist Apr il 22nd 2017 5

Politics

risk of an attack. More than
50,000 security personnel will
be deployed for the election,
mostly at polling stations. 

Purnama, a Christian of
Chinese descent, after a row
about religion came to
dominate the campaign.

A countr y in turmoil

Two students and a member of
the national guard were killed
during mass anti-government
demonstrations in Venezuela.
The opposition blamed armed
supporters of the government
for the students’ deaths. 

Paraguay’s president, Horacio
Cartes, dropped his plan to
change the country’s constitu-
tion to allow him to seek
re-election. In March people
protesting against his scheme
set ﬁre to Congress.

Javier Duarte, a former
governor of the Mexican state
of Veracruz, was arrested at a
hotel in Guatemala. He had
disappeared in October, ac-
cused of corruption and in-
volvement in organised crime.
The nabbing of Mr Duarte
follows the arrest in Italy of
Tomás Yarrington, a former
governor of Tamaulipas, who
has been charged with bank
fraud, money laundering and
drug smuggling. He had been
on the run for nearly ﬁve years.

The government of Canada
proposed a bill to legalise the
recreational use of cannabis.
Under the plan, people will be
allowed to possess up to 30
grams of pot and will be able
to buy it from licensed retailers
or grow up to four marijuana
plants at home. The law would
set a minimum age of 18 for
buying weed.

Bigotr y wins

Anies Baswedan, a former
minister of education, won the
race to become Jakarta’s next
governor. He defeated the
incumbent, Basuki Tjahaja

India’s Supreme Court said
three senior ﬁgures in the
ruling Bharatiya Janata Party
should stand trial for their part
in the violent demolition of a
mosque in Ayodhya in 1992. 

America used the biggest
conventional bomb in its
arsenal against ﬁghters for
Islamic State sheltering in
tunnels in eastern Afghani-
stan. The Massive Ordnance
Air Blast, or “Mother Of All
Bombs”, as the media quickly
dubbed it, weighs 10 tonnes.

China said Interpol had issued
an international request for
the arrest of a Chinese proper-
ty tycoon, Guo Wengui. Oﬃ-
cials gave no details. The busi-
nessman is believed to have
angered the Chinese authori-
ties with interviews he had
given abroad about high-level
corruption in China. 

The chief regulator of China’s
insurance industry, Xiang
Junbo, was dismissed for
“serious violation” of
Communist Party discipline.
Such language often means a
suspect has been accused of
corruption. 

Secur ity measures

Ethiopia extended a state of
emergency it declared in Octo-
ber last year amid protests
against the government. Mean-
while a government-aﬃliated
human-rights organisation
said that 669 people have been
killed in violence and protests
since November 2015.

Uganda withdrew its forces
from the Central African
Republic and called oﬀ a long
hunt for Joseph Kony and his
rebel Lord’s Resistance Army, a
brutal group that forcibly
recruits children as soldiers.

Donald Trump ordered a
review of the nuclear deal
with Iran, whereby most
international sanctions on the
country were rescinded in
return for it dismantling much
of its nuclear programme.

Theresa May surprised her
opponents—and her own
cabinet—by calling a snap
general election in Britain for
June 8th. Since becoming
prime minister in the wake of
David Cameron’s defeat in the
Brexit referendum last sum-
mer, Mrs May has consistently
ruled out fresh elections. But
she now wants her own man-
date in order to end “division”
in Parliament over the negotia-
tions to leave the European
Union. Opinion polls give her
Conservative Party a 20-point
lead, though the electorate is in
an irascible mood. 

George Osborne, one of the
most powerful politicians in
Britain until the Brexit vote,
decided to quit as an MP. The
former chancellor of the exche-
quer had been criticised for
trying to stay in Parliament
while taking up a new job as
editor of a newspaper. 

Voters in Turkey narrowly
approved, by 51% to 49%, a new
constitution that hands sweep-
ing new powers to the presi-
dent and abolishes the job of
prime minister. Recep Tayyip
Erdogan says he needs the
powers to deal with the in-
stability and terrorism that
have beset Turkey, but his
opponents fear he will now
feel emboldened to extend his
political crackdown.

Police in France arrested two
Islamist extremists for alleged-
ly planning terrorist attacks in
the run-up to the ﬁrst round of
the presidential election on
April 23rd. Three leading candi-
dates, Emmanuel Macron,
Marine Le Pen and François
Fillon, had been warned of the

At least 65 children were
among more than 120 people
killed in a bomb attack on
buses carrying residents from
besieged Syrian towns as part
of an agreed evacuation.

The government of Zimba-
bwe ordered banks to accept
livestock as collateral for loans
and schools to accept goats as
payment amid a deepening
economic and currency crisis.
A shortage of American dol-
lars has forced the government
to print its own version,
known as “bond notes”, to
ease a cash crunch.

The killing factor y

Arkansas’s rush to execute
eight death-row inmates with-
in 11 days ran into trouble in
various courts, including the
Supreme Court. The state faces
legal challenges to its reason-
ing that it needs to carry out
the executions before the
expiry date on its stock of a
controversial sedative used in
lethal injections.

Police in Fresno, a city in cen-
tral California, said that a
black man who shot dead
three white people was moti-
vated by racial hatred. The
man shouted “God is great” in
Arabic as he was arrested, but
the police do not believe his
was a terrorist act.

A Democrat came ﬁrst in a
special election for a congres-
sional district in the Atlanta
suburbs that has been held by
the Republicans since the 1970s
and had once been represent-
ed by Newt Gingrich. Jon
Ossoﬀ took just under 50% of
the vote, so he faces a run-oﬀ
against Karen Handel, a
Republican. Democrats think
they can take the seat. Mr
Ossoﬀ’s campaign theme is
“Make Trump Furious”. 

1

mies, Britain saw the biggest
upward revision to its GDP,
which is now expected to
increase by 2%.

Shinzo Abe, Japan’s prime
minister, nominated candi-
dates to replace two members
of the Bank of Japan’s policy
committee who have regularly
held back from endorsing
stimulus measures. If the two
candidates are approved by
Parliament Mr Abe will have
selected all nine members of
the central bank’s board. 

Dropping the anchor

Fox News decided that Bill
O’Reilly, the channel’s biggest
star, should not return to work
after it reviewed allegations
that he had sexually harassed
several women. The claims
had prompted a number of big
advertisers to pull their
business from Fox.

Donald Trump signed an order
that aims to restrict outsourc-
ing companies’ ability to use
the H1-B employment-visa
programme to bring their staﬀ
to America. Mr Trump believes
that foreign workers are getting
jobs that should go to Ameri-
cans and he wants more of the
visas to be given to immigrants
with greater skills. But his
order avoided the tougher
language on H1-Bs that he has

previously used. In Australia,
Malcolm Turnbull, the prime
minister, sounded a similar
note, saying that his govern-
ment would abolish its 457
visa programme for temporary
foreign workers because they
take jobs that should go to
Australians.

Fending oﬀ a hostile-takeover
approach from an American
rival, AkzoNobel proposed a
plan to separate its chemical
division from its paints busi-
ness, which includes the
Dulux brand. The chemical
division would either be sold
or listed separately. 

Volkswagen Group

Operating prof it/loss, €bn
Emissions scandal

2015

16

17*

5

+

0

–

5

10

Sources: Company repor ts;
Bloomberg

*Estimate

Volkswagen reported a quar-
terly operating proﬁt of €4.4bn
($4.7bn), which was well
above market expectations.
The carmaker beneﬁted from a
surge in sales at its core VW
brand as well as cost-cutting. It
is revamping its range as it tries
to put the emissions-cheating

The Economist Apr il 22nd 2017

scandal behind it. The sense of
a fresh start was underlined
recently when it emerged that
Ferdinand Piëch, the long-time
driving force behind the com-
pany, had sold most of his
stake in the group. 

Police in London arrested
Vijay Mallya, as part of the
process of hearing the Indian
government’s request to extra-
dite the entrepreneur. Once
known as the King of the Good
Times, Mr Mallya left India last
year as banks piled on the
pressure over debts racked up
by Kingﬁsher Airlines, which
collapsed in 2012. The Indian
government accuses him of
fraud. Mr Mallya denies ab-
sconding. He has been placed
on bail in London; extraditing
him to India could take years. 

Passenger numbers

United Airlines’ customers
may not have been delighted
to hear that its revenue in-
creased to $8.4bn in the ﬁrst
quarter. The opening para-
graph of United’s earnings
statement acknowledged the
furore surrounding the violent
removal of a passenger from a
ﬂight after he was bumped to
make way for staﬀ, describing
it as “a humbling experience”. 

Other economic data and news
can be found on pages 76-77

6 The world this week

Business

America’s big banks reported
robust earnings for the ﬁrst
quarter. Morgan Stanley’s net
proﬁt soared by 70% compared
with the same three months
last year, to $1.9bn, and Bank of
America’s was up by 40%, to
$4.9bn. Those banks, along
with Citigroup, beneﬁted from
increased trading in bonds,
currencies and commodities.
But Goldman Sachs, the bank
most associated with such
activity, had a ﬂat quarter in
bond trading. Its elevated proﬁt
of $2.2bn did not stop investors
from sending its share price
down by 5%. 

The gamble

Theresa May’s decision to call
a snap election in Britain
pushed the pound above
$1.28, its highest level since
September, as markets specu-
lated that a bigger majority in
Parliament would give a Con-
servative government room to
negotiate a softer Brexit. The
FTSE 100 dropped by 2.5%. A
stronger pound hits the foreign
revenues of the multinationals
that dominate the index. 

With attention focused on the
snap election, the British gov-
ernment admitted that it may
have to sell its remaining ma-
jority stake in Royal Bank of
Scotland at a loss to the tax-
payer. RBS was bailed out
during the ﬁnancial crisis,
when the government bought
shares at £5.02 ($6.40). After
nine consecutive years of huge
losses its shares are now worth
less than half that. 

China’s economy had a
strong start to the year. GDP
expanded by 6.9% in the ﬁrst
quarter compared with the
same period in 2016, the best
performance in 18 months.
Industrial output rose by a
mighty 7.6%. The economy
continued its “rebalancing”,
with consumption accounting
for a much larger proportion of
growth.

The IMF slightly raised its
forecast for growth in the
world economy this year, to
3.5%. Among the richest econo-

Leaders

Handle with extreme care

The Economist Apr il 22nd 2017 7

How Donald Trump should approach the world’s most dangerous regime
NORTH KOREA can be as
confusing as it is alarming.
It is a hereditary Marxist monar-
chy. It has the world’s youngest
supreme leader and also its old-
est. The reigning tyrant, Kim
Jong Un, is in his 30s; and his
grandfather, Kim Il Sung, is the
“eternal president” despite having died in 1994. To celebrate
grandpa Kim’s birthday on April 15th, his grandson ordered
warplanes to ﬂy past in a formation spelling out his age: 105. He
also ordered a gigantic parade, with goose-stepping soldiers
and missiles on trucks. A male-voice choir belted out “Peace is
guaranteed by our arms”, even as the regime threatens to rain
nuclear destruction on its enemies and is building a missile de-
signed to reach the continental United States. 
Dealing with the bellicose junior god-king will be one of
Donald Trump’s trickiest tasks. It will also be the ﬁrst big test of
how he handles relations with China, which are shifting as the
rising superpower challenges the Pax Americana in Asia (see
our special report). There are no good options, but arriving at
the least-bad ones will require understanding both the regime
and the Asian geopolitical jigsaw into which it ﬁts. It will also
require patience. Ominously, Mr Trump says he has little when
it comes to North Korea, and his vice-president, Mike Pence,
says that “all options” are on the table. 
Wanting to do something quickly is emotionally appealing.
North Korea is a vile, blood-drenched dictatorship where any
hint of disloyalty is punishable by gulag or death. Mr Kim has
children imprisoned for their parents’ thought-crimes and his
own relatives murdered on a whim. The prospect of such a
man threatening Los Angeles is harrowing. Yet a pre-emptive
strike on North Korea would be reckless beyond belief (see
page 19). Its nuclear devices are hidden, possibly deep under-
ground. Its missiles are dispersed on mobile launchers. Tokyo
is just across the Sea of Japan. Seoul, the capital of peaceful,
capitalist South Korea, is only a few miles from the border.
Northern artillery and conventional missiles could devastate
it; a conﬂict could rapidly turn nuclear and kill millions. 
Mr Trump cannot possibly want to start a war. His military
actions in Syria and Afghanistan suggest that he is more cau-
tious than his bluster makes him sound. But even creating the
impression that he might strike ﬁrst is dangerous. If Mr Kim
were to believe that an American attack is imminent, he might
order his own pre-emptive nuclear attack, with disastrous con-
sequences. So Mr Trump should cool his rhetoric immediately.

cent missile launches, can slow but not stop him. America can
solve the Korean conundrum only with China’s help. 
China has leverage over Mr Kim. It accounts for 85% of
North Korea’s foreign trade and could shut oﬀ its oil supply. But
its interests are not the same as America’s. North Korea is its
ally. China’s leaders do not like the Kim regime, but they do not
wish to see it collapse and North Korea reunite, German-style,
with the democratic South. That, China fears, would mean the
loss of a valuable buﬀer. There are 28,500 American troops sta-
tioned in the South; China does not want them on its border. 
To contain North Korea—and to conduct a successful foreign
policy more broadly—Mr Trump has to learn how to talk to
China. His instinct is to do deals. Last week he tweeted that he
told Xi Jinping, China’s president, that “a trade deal with the
US will be far better for them if they solve the North Korean
problem!” Later he explained that his decision not to label Chi-
na a currency manipulator, as he had threatened, was a quid
pro quo for China helping out over North Korea. Dropping the
currency threat was the right policy, but Mr Trump’s trans-
actional approach to diplomacy is exactly the wrong one. 
China would love to carve up the world bilaterally into
spheres of inﬂuence, with the great powers dominating their
regions and trading favours elsewhere. America has long been
the guardian of something diﬀerent: a rules-based order that
applies to every country, big or small, and which has under-
pinned the relative peace and remarkable growth of the world
since 1945. That Mr Trump appears to scorn this rules-based
global order is worrying. The world would become a more
dangerous place if America started letting China break the
rules (for example, in the South China Sea) in exchange for
help to resolve whichever issue happens to be in the news. A
better response to China’s rise would be for America to
strengthen the rules-based order and invite China to join it
more actively. Alas, Mr Trump is unlikely to do this. 
So the best hope is that he or his diplomats persuade China
that it is in its own interest to curb North Korea. And the way to
do this is to talk about North Korea itself, not the yuan or Amer-
ican steel jobs. 

Three generations of Kims are enough
China does not gain if North Korea destabilises East Asia, or
starts a regional arms race that leads Japan and South Korea to
build their own nuclear weapons. Mr Trump should reassure
his allies in Tokyo and Seoul that they remain under Uncle
Sam’s protection. But he should also deal with China’s con-
cerns. To that end, he could make it clear that freezing and then
rolling back the North’s nuclear programme is his goal rather
than regime change. He could also guarantee that, were the
North to collapse into the arms of the South, America would
keep its troops south of the current north-south boundary.
China hates to admit that the Kim dynasty might not last, but it
is rash not to plan for that possibility.
The crucial message for Mr Kim as for his predecessors is
that, if the North were to use its nukes, the regime would be
obliterated. In the long run, reuniﬁcation is inevitable and de-
sirable. Meanwhile, the junior god-king can be deterred. 7

Dealmaker, meet deal-breaker
For all his eccentricities, Mr Kim is behaving rationally. He
watched Muammar Qadaﬃ of Libya give up his nuclear pro-
gramme in return for better relations with the West—and end
up dead. He sees his nuclear arsenal as a guarantee that his re-
gime, and he, will survive. (Though it would be suicidal for
him to use it.) Mr Trump can do little to change his mind. Eco-
nomic sanctions that harm his people will not spoil his lunch.
Cyber-attacks, which may account for the failure of some re-

8 Leaders

The French election

Time to decide

The Economist Apr il 22nd 2017

As it goes to the polls, France faces the most consequential choice in decades—and the most uncertain
FRANCE is not just deeply un-
happy, it is at war with itself.
The ﬁrst round of the presiden-
tial election, on April 23rd, could
send any two of four candidates
into a run-oﬀ on May 7th. They
range from the odious right to
the vicious left, with two pro-
market reformers in the middle. Seldom has a European de-
mocracy been so torn between progress and disaster.
After votes for Brexit, Donald Trump and, last week in Tur-
key, for a constitution that cements Recep Tayyip Erdogan’s
power (see page 41), the battle over liberal internationalism
has moved to the cradle of the Enlightenment. The fate of
France is not all that is at stake. The European Union will stall if
one of its driving forces is in chaos or hostile. It may even fail,
wrecking the organising principle of an entire continent.
Outright victory on May 7th for Marine Le Pen, on the far
right, or Jean-Luc Mélenchon, on the hard left, would be a ca-
tastrophe. On that count alone, either of the two pro-market
candidates would be a blessing. But choosing between them
involves a trade-oﬀ and a gamble (see pages 15-18). Emmanuel
Macron is untested and lacks the support of an established
party; François Fillon is a social conservative tarnished by
scandal. On balance, we would support Mr Macron.

the state and tighten beneﬁts. Its labour code is longer than the
Bible. Measured against GDP, government spending is higher
than Sweden’s. It has its share of world-class ﬁrms, but its pub-
lic unions are world-class, too—in seeing oﬀ change.
Mr Fillon thinks he can break this impasse with shock ther-
apy. He wants to cut 500,000 jobs from the civil service and
€100bn from public spending. He would end the 35-hour work
week, raise the retirement age by three years, to 65, and junk
95% of the labour code. An avowed fan of Britain’s former
prime minister, Margaret Thatcher, in a country where she is
loathed, he is pro-business. As important, he has the stomach
for the protracted ﬁghts that reform will surely demand.
Unfortunately, his claim to lead France through divisive
change has been weakened by his own misconduct. One of
those protracted ﬁghts has been over the €900,000 in parlia-
mentary salaries that he got the state to pay his wife and two of
his children, allegedly for doing nothing. In this he is not alone
among French politicians, but he is running for president on a
ticket of unimpeachable probity. Mr Fillon is asking his compa-
triots to make sacriﬁces and to sign up to a new social contract
when he himself embodies the arrogance of the old one.
Mr Macron is untainted, if only because he is a political out-
sider. He has never held elected oﬃce, though he was the ap-
pointed economy minister in the present government. His
plans are less bold than Mr Fillon’s, cutting only 120,000 public
jobs and €60bn in spending, but an independent study rates
them as equally free-market. Mr Macron is pro-business, but
more subtle about it. Instead of abolishing the 35-hour week,
he would help companies work around it. Rather than raise
the retirement age, he would unify the country’s 35 pension
schemes, eventually doing more to enhance labour mobility. 
Mr Macron is more outward-looking, too. He backs recent
EU free-trade deals that Mr Fillon rejects. He is more likely to be
able to work with Germany to strengthen the governance of
the euro. He is socially liberal, whereas his opponent, close to
Roman Catholic traditionalists, opposed gay marriage and
wants to limit gay adoption. Mr Fillon would impose immigra-
tion quotas and end sanctions against Russia; Mr Macron ex-
horts the French to live up to their values. 

Un coup de rouge
Whoever is president will inherit a discontented country. Un-
employment has been stuck above 10% since 2012; for young
people, it is still above 20%. The economy is growing slowly
and does not yield enough tax to pay for the public services
that voters believe are their right. Racial and religious tensions
run high, exacerbated by jihadist attacks. Dislike of the EU is
even stronger than it was in pre-referendum Britain. 
France used to be governed by a cadre of brainy oﬃcials,
who enjoyed privileges and power to match. But that contract
is dead. The approval rating of today’s president was at one
point as low as 4%. The people believe that the elite has failed.
Ms Le Pen and Mr Mélenchon echo their fury. In their own
ways, both hold out the promise of a return to an idealised past
when the state was generous and life more secure. They say
that protectionism can make France richer; that less involve-
ment with NATO and more with Russia would make it safer;
that by renegotiating or leaving the EU it can prosper; and that
earlier retirement and more welfare would increase solidarity.
All this would make France only weaker and more indebted. 
To such incoherence, they add their own kind of venom. Ms
Le Pen would put a moratorium on immigration. She says the
French state bore no guilt for the detention and deportation of
Jews from a Paris velodrome in the second world war. Mr Mé-
lenchon would raise taxes on those earning more than
€400,000 ($430,000) a year to 100% and join a “Bolivarian Al-
liance” with Cuba and Venezuela. 
Instead of strife in the Elysée, France needs a president to
carry through reform. Unlike most EU countries, it has never
taken genuinely painful steps to free the labour market, trim

Macron the mould-breaker
The worry is that Mr Macron will not get his reforms through
the legislature. Though En Marche!, the party he founded, will
run in every constituency in elections to the National Assem-
bly in June, it will struggle to win a majority, unlike Mr Fillon’s
Republicans. But do not write oﬀ his political skills. In rallies
and on TV he has more than held his own. En Marche! is barely
a year old, but it has 250,000 members—more than twice as
many as the Socialists. 
His critics say Mr Macron is wishy-washy. But he is the only
candidate who has made a full-blooded case for the open soci-
ety and economy this newspaper believes in. That takes cour-
age—the courage to step outside France’s party system, to de-
fend complex arguments against polarising sound bites and to
stand for optimism in an age of identity politics. That is a mes-
sage all democracies need to hear. 7

The Economist Apr il 22nd 2017 

Islam in Indonesia

The rise of intolerance

Leaders 9

The world’s biggest Muslim country has been mercifully resistant to extremism—until now
FIRST came the fake news: a
tion is Nahdlatul Ulama (NU), which embraces folksy forms of
doctored video, making it
Islam and explicitly campaigns against extremism. Its wise-
look as if the governor of Jakar-
cracking former leader, Abdurrahman Wahid, was the ﬁrst
ta, an ethnic-Chinese Christian,
president to be elected—albeit by parliament, not by popular
was disparaging the Koran.
vote—after the overthrow of Suharto, Indonesia’s dictator of 32
Next, mass protests ﬂooding the
years. The next president was Megawati Sukarnoputri, a wom-
city centre with outraged Mus-
an. No avowedly religious party has ever received more than
lims. Then came blasphemy
8% of the vote in parliamentary elections.
charges that the police, under public pressure, eventually
lodged against Basuki Tjahaja Purnama, usually known as
Ahok. Before long a seemingly pedestrian election became a
referendum on the role of Islam in Indonesian politics. Was it
permissible for a Christian to hold the second-most prominent
elected oﬃce in an overwhelmingly Muslim country?
On April 19th voters delivered their verdict: no. Ahok, once
the clear front-runner, had won the ﬁrst round of the election,
in February, by a slim three percentage points. But supporters
of the eliminated candidate appear to have plumped for
Ahok’s remaining rival, Anies Baswedan, who won the sec-
ond round by 58% to 42% (see page 20). Although Mr Baswe-
dan praised Ahok in his victory speech, he had openly wooed
the chauvinist vote during the campaign, for instance by join-
ing rabble-rousing clerics for dawn prayers before a vitupera-
tive anti-Ahok rally. Plainly, the outcome is a defeat for toler-
ance, in a country that prides itself on it.
It is easy to forget, but Indonesia, not Egypt or Iran, much
less Saudi Arabia, is the world’s most populous Muslim coun-
try. There are far more Muslims in South and South-East Asia
than there are in the Middle East. And Muslims in Asia are tra-
ditionally much less doctrinaire than Middle Easterners.
Indonesia is a case in point: many local Muslims follow
practices that would cause riots in Arabia, making oﬀerings to
saints and spirits, say, or worshipping at shrines shared with
Hindus and Buddhists. Indonesia’s biggest Islamic organisa-

The call from Arabia
And yet for decades less tolerant forms of Islam have been
seeping into the country. In fact, NU was founded in 1926 to re-
sist the growing inﬂuence of puritanical Arabian preachers. To
this day Gulf Arabs fund lots of mosques. Rabble-rousers are
able to turn out big crowds to protest against perceived insults
to Islam. The agitators portray traditional Indonesian Islam as
rural and backward, implying that educated city-dwellers
should follow a purer form of the religion. Politicians, even
otherwise reasonable ones like Mr Baswedan, seldom resist
the urge to cloak themselves in piety.
Joko Widodo, Indonesia’s president and Ahok’s predeces-
sor as Jakarta’s governor, supported his embattled protégé in
the election. But he was careful to be respectful of the protes-
ters, meeting their leaders and oﬀering only veiled criticism of
their conduct. Local mores, it is often said, demand such reti-
cence. But the other side felt no such obligation, brandishing
signs with slogans like “Burn Christians, Jail Ahok”. 
The governor’s race has given unscrupulous politicians a
simple blueprint for winning oﬃce: stir up religious fervour by
decrying real or invented insults to Islam. The opposition is
likely to resort to such tactics in the next presidential election,
due in 2019. If Mr Joko wants to keep his job, and preserve In-
donesia’s plural society, he needs to speak out forcefully
against zealotry, not treat it with kid gloves. 7

Airlines in Amer ica

Whack-a-passenger

Per passenger, $

Nor th
Amer ica

Airline net prof its

Americans are treated abysmally by their airlines. They should look to Europe for lessons
DECADES ago travelling by
air in America was a glam-
orous aﬀair. Today it signals de-
lays, discomfort, extra charges
and the threat of violence. A vid-
eo of a passenger being forcibly
dragged from a United Airlines
ﬂight on April 9th, after too few
people volunteered to give up their seats, has sparked an out-
pouring of complaints about ﬂying in America. Passengers are
right to moan. America’s airlines really do compare badly with
foreign ones. European carriers are the best point of reference. 
Air fares are higher per seat mile in America than in Europe.

When costs fall, consumers in America fail to enjoy the bene-
ﬁts. The global price of jet fuel—one of the biggest costs for air-
lines—has fallen by half since 2014. That triggered a fare war be-
tween European carriers, but in America ticket prices have
hardly budged. Airlines in North America posted a proﬁt of
$22.40 per passenger last year; in Europe the ﬁgure was $7.84.
Standards of service are also worse. Only one operator
based in America can be found in the world’s 30 best carriers,
as rated by Skytrax, an aviation website, compared with nine
from Europe. When Ryanair, currently Europe’s largest and
cheapest airline, cut service to the bone, it began to lose cus-
tomers and money. That prompted it to perform a U-turn and
be “nicer” to customers, in order to protect its market share 

30

20

10

0

2012

13

Europe

1

14

15

16*

*Estimate

10 Leaders

The Economist Apr il 22nd 2017

2 from rivals like easyJet, Wizz Air and Norwegian.
This happy combination of low fares and reasonable ser-
vice has a simple explanation: competition. American policy-
makers have presided over a wave of mergers in the past few
years. The biggest four carriers in America between them now
control 80% of the market, compared with just 48% a decade
ago. Warren Buﬀett, a man who knows an oligopoly when he
sees one, bought nearly $10bn-worth of airline stock in 2016. In
Europe, where the top four carriers have around 45% of the
market, policymakers have got three things right. 
First, European regulators have tried harder to preserve
competition between existing carriers. The EU has been will-
ing to block mergers, such as a proposed tie-up between Rya-
nair and Aer Lingus, and to prevent airlines from building mo-
nopoly positions at airports. Not so in America: at 40 of its 100
biggest hubs, a single carrier now accounts for more than half
of capacity. That pushes up prices. The merger of American
and US Airways in 2013 increased American’s market share at
Philadelphia’s airport to 77%. Fares rose from 4% below the na-
tional average in 2013 to 11% above after the merger. 
Second, Europe has made it easier for foreigners to boost
competition by entering new markets. There are no ownership

limits at all between European countries; and the EU lets air-
lines with a non-EU owner that has a stake of up to 49% ﬂy any-
where within the bloc. America caps foreign ownership at
25%. Foreign joint ventures, such as Virgin America (which was
acquired by Alaska Air Group last year) struggle to take oﬀ. 
Third, Europe has also encouraged competition between
diﬀerent airports and their main operators. Breaking up the
ownership of London’s biggest three airports has saved pas-
sengers £420m ($628m) in fares since 2009, according to ICF In-
ternational, a consultancy. In contrast, most American cities
have only one airport, many of them publicly owned. 

Dogﬁghters
Some of Europe’s advantages are hard to replicate. Distances
between big cities are shorter, making road and rail transport
serious rivals. Yet that is all the more reason for America to pro-
mote competition in the sky. America’s regulators should loos-
en the cap on foreign ownership, take away slots from incum-
bents and promote the use of secondary airports to give new
entrants a leg-up. If that doesn’t yield dividends, regulators
should consider breaking up the big airlines. Allowing compe-
tition to wither was a huge mistake. It should be rectiﬁed. 7

Corporate-bond markets

Broken dealers 

10

16

1.5

1.0

0.5

0

2000

05

United States, $trn

Corporate-bond issuance

plemented after the ﬁnancial crisis sought to discourage banks
from holding bonds. Trading desks now hold just 1% of all
bonds, down from 2.4% as recently as 2007. Average trade sizes
have also fallen. Demand from central banks, in places where
corporate-bond purchases were part of quantitative-easing
(QE) programmes, may have obscured the extent to which
marketmakers have pulled back. As QE unwinds, shortfalls in
liquidity may become apparent.
Restoring the banks to their market-making role by relaxing
capital rules is no answer. If trouble strikes, it is better for banks
to be out of harm’s way. Instead, corporate-bond markets need
to learn from equities and help buyers and sellers to meet and
trade. Regulators can do their bit by requiring prices to be re-
ported for completed transactions, as incoming European
rules will from early 2018, and as America has in a more limit-
ed fashion since 2002. But the market is also showing the way.
A new technology known as “all-to-all” trading allows one in-
stitutional investor in a network to trade bonds with any other.
There are also systems to help dealers keep track of inquiries
across time, turning them from risk-takers into matchmakers. 

Corporate-bond markets are astonishingly archaic. Time to bring them into the 21st century
STOCKMARKETS are the pub-
lic face of ﬁnance; indices like
the S&P 500 are widely reported
proxies for economic health. But
they are dwarfed by the cor-
porate-bond markets. In 2016
American 
equity
issuance
amounted to just under $200bn;
for corporate bonds the total was $1.5trn. 
The market for corporate debt is not just vast, at $50trn glob-
ally, it has also been growing fast as a result of ultra-cheap bor-
rowing. Issuance in America has risen by half over the past ﬁve
years. Yet despite its importance as a source of ﬁnancing for
companies, the corporate-bond market is shockingly archaic.
Even basic price data are hard to come by. Whereas stocks can
be traded at the click of a button, buying and selling corporate
bonds often requires a phone call to a trading desk at an invest-
ment bank. This method of trading still accounts for over 80%
of volume in America. Processes are correspondingly slow: 8%
of trades in Europe fail to settle in the allotted two days.
Such ineﬃciencies partly reﬂect the particularities of bond
markets. An individual ﬁrm may have one or two types of
shares, but issue dozens of bonds that diﬀer by maturity, date
and seniority in its capital structure. Any given bond is thus
traded only rarely. In the past, banks made markets by holding
an inventory of bonds on their balance-sheet until a buyer
came along. Those electronic platforms that do exist have
largely stuck to this dealer-based model: under “request for
quote” systems that account for almost 95% of electronic trad-
ing, dealers are still the only ones with the power to provide a
quote and to buy or sell (see page 61).
But this system is creaking. Tougher capital regulations im-

Entering the electronic age
These innovations will not suit everyone. The automation of
equity markets has cut the earnings of brokers; an end to those
chummy phone calls will do the same in the bond markets.
But investors can only gain from an environment where it is
easier and cheaper to buy and sell bonds. Issuers will also
beneﬁt from markets that can smooth out turbulence rather
than turn it into a full-scale panic and, in normal times, from a
lower cost of capital. The corporate-bond market will never be
as simple or liquid as the stockmarket. But it can still learn les-
sons from its higher-proﬁle cousin. 7

The Economist Apr il 22nd 2017 

Br itain’s election

Game change

Leaders 11

Nowhere does that matter more than with Brexit. Having
triggered Article 50 last month, Britain and the rest of the EU
have two years to negotiate a deal. Almost nobody thinks that
oﬀers enough time. After March 2019, unless both sides agree
on some sort of transition, Britain will crash ruinously out of
the union. Until a new regime is sorted out over a number of
years, Britain will be able to sell into its most important market
only under World Trade Organisation rules.
The election makes this less likely. Although Mrs May has
sometimes threatened to leave without any agreement, saying
“no deal is better than a bad deal”, she has lately accepted the
need for a transition arrangement after Brexit. With a larger
majority she can more easily stand up to her ultra-Eurosceptic
backbenchers, some of whom seem actively to want Britain to
crash out. That explains why the pound rose this week.
The election also buys Mrs May time. Holding a vote this
year means that she need not face the polls again until 2022,
three years after Britain’s formal exit from the EU. Avoiding the
pressure of an imminent contest at home will further streng-
then her against the headbanging fringe of her own party and
the right-wing press, which screams treachery at any hint of
the compromises needed to secure a deal with the EU.

An election gives Theresa May the hope of a far larger majority. It also oﬀers the chance of a better Brexit
FOR an event that was sup-
posed to settle a big political
question once and for all, last
year’s referendum on Britain’s
membership of the European
Union has proved spectacularly
disruptive. First it did for the gov-
ernment of David Cameron,
who had called it expecting a win for Remain. Then it pro-
voked renewed calls for separation in Scotland and Northern
Ireland, which opposed Brexit. Now Theresa May, who en-
tered Downing Street only last summer, has called a snap gen-
eral election for June 8th, having previously insisted that such
a course would cause further “instability”. Britons are facing
their third national poll in two years.
Mrs May says the election is necessary to protect the Brexit
process from mischievous opposition parties that plan to de-
rail it. That is nonsense: although most MPs, including her
own, campaigned to Remain, they have dutifully upheld the
referendum result in Parliament. Surely more important in the
prime minister’s calculation are the opinion polls that show
her Conservative Party more than 20 percentage points ahead
of the Labour opposition, which is hamstrung by its ineﬀectual
leader, Jeremy Corbyn (see page 47). Elections are inherently
hard to predict—this one could be treated by voters as a poll
about everything from the railways to the National Health Ser-
vice. But, with Mr Corbyn clinging on and the economy yet to
feel the smack of Brexit, Mrs May has a chance to increase her
working majority of 17 to perhaps more than 100.
For the 48% of voters who, like this newspaper, opposed
Brexit, this may look ominous. Mrs May is aiming for a “hard”
exit, needlessly taking Britain out of the EU’s single market so
she can clamp down on immigration, which would do more
harm still. The election looks likely to strengthen her hand. In
fact, it oﬀers an opportunity for those who believe in a more
open, liberal Britain. A bigger majority would leave Mrs May
freer to strike sensible compromises with the EU. And the elec-
tion provides a chance to give liberals of all political stripes a
louder voice in the debate that will dominate the next few
years. The outcome could be a less damaging Brexit.

Maybe not
Just what use Mrs May makes of that freedom depends upon
her own preferences for Brexit—which are still not entirely
clear even if she sounds tough. Her record is neither rabidly pro
(in the referendum she was a reluctant Remainer) nor instinc-
tively against (see Bagehot). Crucially, though, to the extent
that the hard Brexiteers are pushed to the margins, other voices
will be able to enter the debate. 
In Parliament the election will end the odd situation in
which MPs have been bound both by the wishes of their con-
stituents in the previous election and also by the referendum.
The next parliament’s MPs will have a mandate to stand up for
whatever they advocate on the stump, be it hard Brexit, soft
Brexit or complete Breversal.
The Liberal Democrats, reduced to just eight seats at the last
election, are the most pro-EU force in British politics. Their re-
surgence—and the likely collapse of the vote for the pro-Brexit
UK Independence Party—would increase the ranks of Remain-
ers in Parliament, and encourage the Conservatives to choose
Eurosensible candidates in marginal seats. Last year Zac Gold-
smith, a prominent Tory Leaver, was ejected by the Lib Dems in
a by-election. Tories ﬁghting seats in Remain-voting areas such
as London and the university towns may have to soften their
line on Brexit if they are to avoid a similar fate.
The debate outside Parliament will matter more, too. Since
the referendum those advocating a soft Brexit have been
shouted down as anti-democratic. All that changes with the
news of an election. Businesses, lobby groups and, of course,
private citizens have a chance to make the case for a soft Brexit
both during the campaign and after it, during the long months
of negotiation to follow. The battle over Brexit was fought last
summer. The battle to deﬁne what form it should take is far
from over. 7

June, the making of May
From a prime minister who has made several U-turns in her
nine months in power, this one was dramatic. Only last month
her oﬃcial spokesman insisted: “There is not going to be a gen-
eral election.” But it is a reversal that might mean fewer U-turns
in future. Mrs May will draw up her own manifesto, rather
than being half-bound by the promises of her predecessor,
which forced her into the embarrassing withdrawal of part of
last month’s budget. If the polls are correct, she will have
enough MPs to push through unpopular but necessary sol-
utions to problems such as the housing shortage and the fund-
ing crisis in social care, which she has so far approached only
timidly. With a proper mandate and some clout in Parliament,
the prime minister would have the chance to shake oﬀ the
“Theresa Maybe” nickname that we gave her earlier this year.

12

Letters

Deal or no deal?

Most sensible people would
agree that after all this time
together in the European
Union single market, London
and Brussels should try to
preserve as much preferential
treatment as possible by enter-
ing into a high-quality free-
trade agreement, and not
revert to trade only on WTO
terms if there is no deal. But
how bad would no deal be?
“A race against time” (April
1st) gave the impression that
reverting to trade on WTO
terms would be damaging to
Britain, citing tariﬀs on exports
to the EU of 10% on cars, 15% on
food and 36% on dairy pro-
ducts. But if this looks bad for
Britain, it is much worse for the
remaining EU members. 
In January this year, Britain
exported £1.5bn-worth ($1.9bn)
of vehicles to other EU coun-
tries, but imported £3.6bn-
worth of vehicles from these
other members. When we add
the pound’s more than 10%
depreciation since the Brexit
vote, the WTO-based tariﬀ
protection for cars is, in eﬀect,
eliminated on British exports
but doubled on those from
other EU members to Britain. 
As for food and agriculture,
in January, British exports of
all categories of food and
agricultural goods amounted
to just 6.3% of all British ex-
ports to the EU. In that month
alone, Britain had a trade
deﬁcit of £1.4bn in its agricul-
tural trade with the EU. 
Surely, if there are sensible
people in Brussels, they will
recognise that it is very much
in their interests to join There-
sa May in arguing for the nego-
tiation of a high-quality free-
trade deal concurrently with
other Brexit negotiations.

ANDREW STOLER

Former deputy director-general
of the World Trade Organisation
Adelaide, Australia

Taking on the neighsayers

The place of the horse in the
economy and society did
indeed vanish quickly (Free
exchange, April 1st). But horses
can’t vote. We can. The com-
parison of humans to horses
being displaced by technology

raises the question of just how
democracies will cope with
the disruption of jobs by auto-
mation. We have already seen
the rise of virulent, sometimes
revanchist politicians, promis-
ing to bring back jobs. What
will happen when human
labour is squeezed further? 
There are solutions to an
economy where full employ-
ment is either impossible or
more unstable than it has been
since the Industrial Revolu-
tion. These solutions, such as a
universal basic income, or
universal national service, or
shifting tax to passive income
rather than wages and salaries,
will take substantial changes
in government. How fortunate
that we, unlike equine labour-
ers, have the means to expand
our freedoms and choose our
response to the growing poten-
tial of machines. 

EVAN PRESTON

Programme director 
Fair Share Education Fund
Washington, DC

The number of robots may be
increasing, but it is still hu-
mans who decide how many
there will be, and the work
they do. The limits of robot
capabilities can be demon-
strated by a simple test: just
give one a shovel and ask it to
muck out a stable, having ﬁrst
determined whether there is a
horse in residence, what mood
it is in and how to persuade
Dobbin not to kick R2-D2’s
digital derrière.

MALCOM HARKER

Seattle

The scales of justice

Fees for employment tribunals
are not the only barrier to
enforcing employment rights
in Britain (“Justice in an age of
austerity”, April 1st). In 2013
legal aid was withdrawn from

many areas of law other than
discrimination cases, includ-
ing employment-law advice
and representation. Fewer
legal-advice centres are able to
provide a service for their
vulnerable clients, and many
continue to face cuts in fund-
ing. The economic cost of
unresolved legal problems
however can be enormous.
The government is promising a
review of cuts to legal aid and a
consultation paper next year
on legal support. Action to
improve access to justice is
urgently needed.

MARTIN BARNES

Chief executive
LawWorks
London

Waste of papers

The notion that scientiﬁc
journals are slowing progress
is an opinion that is increasing-
ly articulated by scientists
themselves (“Time’s up”,
March 25th). As an editor and
reviewer of research articles, I
see the problem diﬀerently.
Many of us assume that the
publication of research is to
inform accurately, and in the
instance of clinical research, to
improve the health of people.
But many clinical-research
papers submitted for review
are on the march to irrele-
vance. These articles are scien-
tiﬁcally sound, well-designed,
utilise the best biomedical
advances and employ the
most sophisticated statistical
programmes. The problem is
that too many of them are not
relevant to the readership of
the journals. If the claim is
correct that most clinical re-
search is false and most of it
not useful, then the risk of
trying to ﬁx the wrong target is
that it will foster the prolifer-
ation of more false and
non-useful research, but do so
more quickly.

ARTHUR AMMANN

San Rafael, California

How do you fund an interna-
tional journal that is open
access? I edit a journal, and
there are costs that have to be
covered for editing (most
authors are not native English
speakers), translation (authors
can submit papers in French,

The Economist Apr il 22nd 2017

Spanish or Portuguese) and the
management of the submis-
sions process. We also have to
cover the costs of a policy that
provides free subscriptions to
institutions in poorer coun-
tries. If I have to fund this
journal from payments made
by authors, I would lose most
of my most insightful (and
inﬂuential) writers. 

DAVID SATTERTHWAITE

Editor
Environment and Urbanisation
London

Is they right?

I was delighted to read John-
son’s column on trying to ﬁnd
a gender-neutral pronoun
(April 1st). As he said, the Ox-
ford English Dictionary’s ﬁrst
use of a sex-neutral, indeﬁnite
“they” was about 1375. For
some mysterious reason,
school marms and style man-
uals decided that the epicene
“they” was ungrammatical. As
a result, people began saying
truly ungrammatical sen-
tences such as “Everybody
likes pizza, doesn’t he or she”
in an attempt to sound correct.
They failed.
I wrote about this subject in
an essay that appeared in
American Speech in 1982.

GEORGE JOCHNOWITZ

Professor emer itus of linguistics
College of Staten Island, CUNY
New York

A bumpy ﬂight

On September 26th 2015 you
published a letter of mine, in
which I speculated that the
new United Airlines’ CEO’s
prior experience as a railroad
executive would serve him
well when squeezing pas-
sengers into planes like cattle
cars. How prescient I must
have been. Looks like the same
experience applies to squeez-
ing people out of planes (“Air
rage”, April 15th).

PETER PRASTHOFER

The Woodlands, Texas 7

Letters are welcome and should be
addressed to the Editor at 
The Economist, 25 St James’s Street,

London sw1A 1hg

E-mail: letters@economist.com
More letters are available at:

Economist.com/letters

Executive Focus

13

Regional Coordinator – West and Central Africa

The World Agroforestr y Centre (ICRAF) is looking for a Regional 
Coordinator in charge of West and Central Africa to contextualize and 
deliver ICRAF’s strategy and by extension, the CGIAR’s Strategic Results 
Framework, in the assigned geographic and socio-political region, in 
partnership with appropriate and relevant regional and national partners 
from across all sectors of society, for the beneﬁ t of the region and beyond. 
S/he will also provide overall leadership within the region to represent 
ICRAF’s interests in the region and ensure quality execution of ICRAF 
research activities in the region.
S/he will promote the right conditions for countries in the region to 
implement agroforestr y R&D, development of CGIAR Research 
Programs and to provide support for ICRAF’s work, through foresight 
studies.
S/he will lead the development and implementation of a regional strategy 
that responds to local needs and opportunities while furthering ICRAF’s 
global mission.
S/he will monitor implementation and review/ improve the regional 
strategy as necessar y.
S/he will facilitate institutional integration and coherence through regular 
communication and liaison with ICRAF’s programmatic, thematic and 
geographic leadership.

For the full Job description please visit:
http://worldagroforestr y.org/working-for-icraf/vacancies
Applications will be considered until 14 May 2017.

The Economist Apr il 22nd 2017

14

Executive Focus

The OPEC Fund 
for 
International Development (OFID)

The OPEC Fund for International Development (OFID), based in Vienna – Austria, is 
the development fi nance institution established by the Member States of OPEC in 1976 
as a collective channel of aid to the developing countries. OFID works in cooperation 
with developing country partners and the international donor community to stimulate 
economic growth and alleviate poverty in all disadvantaged regions of the world. To 
date, OFID has made fi nancial commitments of more than US$ 20.3 billion to over 
3,600 operations across 134 countries worldwide.
In pursuit of its Organizational Strengthening Program, OFID has openings and seeks 
to fi ll the following vacancies:

i. 

Senior Director, Corporate Services Department – (OFID Member 
Countries’ Nationals only)
ii. Head, Internal Audit Function – (Open to all nationalities)
iii Private Sector Operations Offi cer  – (Preference will be given to OFID 
Member Countries’ Nationals)
iiii. Economist – (Preference will be given to OFID Member Countries’ 
Nationals)
v. Credit Analyst – (Preference will be given to OFID Member Countries’ 
Nationals)
vi. Risk Analyst – (Preference will be given to OFID Member Countries’ 
Nationals)

OFID offers an internationally competitive remuneration and benefi ts package, 
which includes tax-exempt salary, dependent children education grant, relocation 
grant, home leave allowance, medical and accident insurance schemes, dependency 
allowance, annual leave, staff retirement benefi t, diplomatic immunity and privileges, 
as applicable.
Interested applicants are invited to visit OFID’s website at www.ofi d.org for detailed 
descriptions of duties and required qualifi cations, as well as procedure for applications 
for the above mentioned positions and other vacant positions listed on OFID’s website.
The deadline for receipt of applications is May 1, 2017.
Due to the expected volume of applications, OFID would only enter into further 
correspondence with short-listed candidates.

The African Export-Import Bank (Afreximbank) is a pan-African Multilateral ﬁ nancial institution established in 1993, for the purpose of ﬁ nancing and promoting intra and extra African 
trade. “The Bank” is currently hiring the below positions. "The Bank" is headquartered in Cairo, Egypt. 
To view further information on Afreximbank please visit their website: www.afreximbank.com.

Senior Manager, Forfaiting
Based: Cairo, Egypt
Contact: Robyn at robyn@caglobalint.com

Manager, Advisory & Capital Markets
Based: Cairo, Egypt
Contact: Thania at thania@caglobalint.com

Manager, Strategy & Business Planning 
(Development Outcomes) Based: Cairo, Egypt
Contact: Thania at thania@caglobalint.com

Senior Manager, Equity Mobilisation
Based: Cairo, Egypt
Contact: Danelle at danelle@caglobalint.com

Manager, Syndications (Distribution)
Based: Cairo, Egypt
Contact: Thania at thania@caglobalint.com 

Manager, Client Relations (North Africa & Non-
Regionals) Based: Cairo, Egypt
Contact: Lizette at lizette@caglobalint.com

Senior Manager, Protocol Services
Based: Cairo, Egypt
Contact: Pandora at pandora@caglobalint.com

Manager, Trade Finance (Southern Africa)
Based: Harare, Zimbabwe 
Contact: Danelle at danelle@caglobalint.com 

Manager, Credit Assessment (Projects & Special 
Programmes) Based: Cairo, Egypt
Contact: Thania at thania@caglobalint.com

Senior Manager, Research (Trade Information)
Based: Cairo, Egypt
Contact: Pandora at pandora@caglobalint.com

Manager, Administration (Ofﬁ ce Management
& Business Continuity) Based: Cairo, Egypt
Contact: Robyn at robyn@caglobalint.com

Manager, Credit Assessment (Intra African Trade 
Initiative) Based: Cairo, Egypt
Contact: Thania at thania@caglobalint.com

Manager, Internal Audit 
Based: Cairo, Egypt
Contact: Danelle at danelle@caglobalint.com

Manager, Risk Management (Operational Risk) 
Based: Cairo, Egypt
Contact: Danelle at danelle@caglobalint.com

Assistant Manager, Communications (Media 
Relations & Events) Based: Cairo, Egypt
Contact: Pandora at pandora@caglobalint.com

Manager, Client Relations (Southern Africa)
Based: Harare, Zimbabwe
Contact: Lizette at lizette@caglobalint.com

Manager, Treasury Sales & Marketing 
(Africa Funds) Based: Cairo, Egypt
Contact: Pandora at pandora@caglobalint.com

CA Global Headhunters have been exclusively retained to search and select the ﬁ nal shortlists for these positions. To apply please visit our website www.ca-ﬁ nance.com/latest-jobs or for 
more information contact Bryan Le Roux, Director at CA Global Headhunters on +27 (0) 216599200.

The Economist Apr il 22nd 2017

 
Br ieﬁng The French election

The Economist Apr il 22nd 2017 15

La lutte

A N G E R S , P A R I S A N D S T R A S B O U R G

The stakes, and the uncertainty, surrounding this vote are higher than at any time in
recent history
THE local co-ordinator, Bruno Studer,
turns up on a bicycle, his front basket
stuﬀed with leaﬂets. On a tree-lined Stras-
bourg square he, Georges and Florent—a
high-school teacher, a medical student and
an auditor—huddle over a printout from
Google maps. They tick oﬀ the streets al-
ready trodden, divide up those still to go,
and head out for another evening of door-
to-door canvassing. With over 3,000 local
members, the team has organised 50 politi-
cal meetings in the area over the past four
months, and distributed 150,000 manifes-
tos and ﬂyers. “We’ve shown we can do a
lot with very little,” says Mr Studer. 
This cheerful trio is part of the army of
enthusiastic local volunteers behind En
Marche! (“On the Move!”), the movement
founded a year ago by Emmanuel Macron,
a 39-year-old former Socialist economy
minister and one-time investment banker.
In their T-shirts emblazoned with the
movement’s handwritten logo and bear-
ing festive balloons, they have helped,
street by street, to achieve something re-
markable: turning a rank outsider once dis-
missed as a traitor, an upstart, or a dreamer,
into someone who could quite plausibly
soon be the president. Four days before the
ﬁrst round of France’s presidential election
on April 23rd, the polls put Mr Macron,
who has never been elected to anything, at

the head of the ﬁeld. The race is very close
(see chart 1 on next page). But if the ﬁrst
round does indeed go well for him, Mr
Macron’s chances in the head-to-head sec-
ond round on May 7th seem pretty good 
Since the Fifth Republic was set up by
Charles de Gaulle in 1958, no independent
candidate without electoral experience
has come anything like this close to the
French presidency. When Valéry Giscard
d’Estaing set up a new party, the Indepen-
dent Republicans, in 1966, it took him eight
more years
to become president—by
which time he had been in parliament, oﬀ
and on, for almost two decades. Mr Mac-
ron’s experience is limited to two years as a
staﬀer to François Hollande, the incum-
bent Socialist president, and two years as
an appointed minister. 
His rise is made all the more extraordi-
nary by the fact that his sunny outlook
seems singularly ill-suited to the sullen, an-
gry mood that his main competitors seek
to capitalise on. In the 1990s his unapolo-
getically optimistic, market-minded inter-
nationalism would have seemed unexcep-
tional; in the 2010s hearing him stir crowds
with praise for Europe and openness
seems both brave and incongruous. 
But if he is more upbeat than his popu-
list competitors on many subjects, Mr Mac-
ron shares one crucial bit of ras-le-bol (fed-

up-ness) with France’s voters: he has had
enough of the established political group-
ings that have dominated the Fifth Repub-
lic. As a minister he spent nearly 200 hours
in parliamentary commissions and de-
bates trying to convince deputies of the
merits of his draft law to deregulate Sun-
day trading, the notary profession, coach
transport and other protected industries.
He came away convinced that centre-lean-
ing deputies from the left and right might
have backed his bill, but party machines
tied their hands. 
Less than a year after a watered-down
version of the bill was ﬁnally forced
through 
the assembly, Mr Macron
launched En Marche! in his home town of
Amiens, in the Somme region of northern
France. The idea, he declared, was to “un-
block” France, build cross-party support
for reform among those willing to forego
party dogma, and bring fresh faces and
new thinking into politics. Few paid much
heed; the country has a minor history of
liberals and centrists who come to naught.
Until September last year, no polling group
even investigated his potential as an inde-
pendent candidate. 
But as the campaign heated up the es-
tablished parties of left and right did their
deprecator a big favour. For the ﬁrst time
they both held primaries open to the gen-
eral public, and both ended up picking a
candidate that suited the more radical ele-
ments of their respective bases. Benoît Ha-
mon, a Socialist former backbench rebel,
sits to the left of his party. François Fillon, a
former prime minister, is on the conserva-
tive Roman Catholic right of the Republi-
cans. That opened an unusually wide
space in the unfashionable political centre 

1

16 Br ieﬁng The French election

2 for Mr Macron. 
Abandoning the centre did not make
the established parties popular with the
extremes. Those on the hard and far right
have stood by Marine Le Pen of the Nation-
al Front. Those on the left have in the past
few weeks rallied to Jean-Luc Mélenchon,
a ﬁst-clenching admirer of Venezuela’s
Hugo Chávez. Add to this the fact that Mr
Hamon has run a campaign too pallid to
give him a shot at the second round and Mr
Fillon has been damaged by scandal—his
use of the parliamentary payroll to remu-
nerate his wife and two of his children is
now under judicial investigation—and you
have an unprecedented collapse in sup-
port for the groupings that have run France
over the past 60 years. 
Three-quarters of voters are telling poll-
sters that they may back a candidate from
neither of the established parties. Fully
half of them say they could vote for Mr Mé-
lenchon, Ms Le Pen, or one of the minor
fringe candidates—a cause of deep concern
for other European countries, since both
Mr Mélenchon and Ms Le Pen want, in ef-
fect, to break up the EU. 
Ms Le Pen, Mr Macron, Mr Fillon and Mr
Mélenchon all have a shot at getting
through Sunday’s ﬁrst round. The Econo-
mist has built a model based on polling
from this and past years to rate their subse-
quent chances (see chart 2 on next page). It
oﬀers good news to the mainstream candi-
dates, bad news to those on the extremes.
Mr Macron, if he makes it through, appears
a strong favourite; whoever she meets in
the second round, Ms Le Pen looks highly
likely to lose. 
It should be noted, though, that in past
elections the main candidates tended to
have established parties and the range of
views was narrower. This may limit the old
data’s predictive value: a lead in the polls
that gave, say, a 90% chance of victory in
the past may not do so this time round. Jé-
rôme Fourquet of Ifop, a pollster, speaks for
many seasoned observers of French poli-
tics when he says nothing can be ruled
out—even Ms Le Pen v Mr Mélenchon.

Tax inspectors and peasants
With 250,000 members En Marche! is now
more than twice the size of the ruling So-
cialist Party. Mr Macron’s supporters tend
to be well educated, metropolitan—the
Uber-using classes—and happy. Fully 72%
call themselves “optimistic”, next to just
29% of those who back Ms Le Pen, who was
consistently ahead in the polls earlier in
the campaign. “It’s the ﬁrst time that a can-
didate is oﬀering something diﬀerent,
something positive,” says a retired tax in-
spector at a Macron rally in Angers, a cathe-
dral town in western France. But Mr Mac-
ron’s support extends beyond the urban
well-to-do. At a dairy farm in nearby Ma-
yenne, where village shops shut at lunch-
time and mud clings to his city shoes, he

Tighter still

1

France, presidential election polling

First round, selected candidates, %
Le Pen (National Front)
Macron (En Marche!)
Fillon (Republicans)
Hamon (Socialist Par ty)
Mélenchon (Unsubmissive France)

30

25

20

15

10

5

0

Jan

Feb

Mar

Apr

2017

Sources: National polls; The Economist

draws curious locals as if to a prize breed.
“All the other candidates live oﬀ politics,”
says Patrick Pervis, who calls himself a
paysan (peasant). “But Macron hasn’t been
in politics; he knows the world of work.” 
Mr Macron sleeps little, reads a lot, lin-
gers with dinner guests until late, and has
an uncanny ability to give the person he is
speaking to, whether a disgruntled farmer
or a visiting entrepreneur, the feeling that
he is actually interested in what they have
to say. Early in the campaign he used his
sense of humour to brush aside a rumour,
long circulating in Paris, that he was having
a secret gay aﬀair: it must have been his
“hologram”, he joked, nodding to a cam-
paign tool used by one of his rivals. He has
gathered an eclectic mix of supporters in-
cluding François Bayrou, a many-time
presidential candidate who tried and
failed to build popular support for his own
centrist politics; Alain Madelin, a liberal ex-
ﬁnance minister; Daniel Cohn-Bendit, a
1968 rebel-turned-Green politician; and
Manuel Valls, a Socialist ex-prime minister
who was beaten by Mr Hamon in his
party’s primary. 
While Mr Macron is trying to mobilise
the France that still waves Europe’s ﬂag at
rallies, two other candidates are harness-
ing the howl of rage against it, and the polit-
ical establishment more generally. Ms Le
Pen campaigns against Europe and the
euro, as well as immigration and “Islam-
ism”, with the slogan “In the name of the
people”. Mr Mélenchon calls Europe “the
dictatorship of banks” and campaigns
with the slogan “The force of the people”.
While not explicitly in favour of “Frexit”, as
Ms Le Pen is, he talks of breaking Europe’s
rules and taking back power in a way that
the EU—and, particularly, Germany—
would be unable to stomach, raising the
possibility of France being thrown out of
the club it founded (“Frejection”?).
Mr Fillon is not as much of a Europhile
as Mr Macron. And he sides with Ms Le Pen
and Mr Mélenchon in favouring closer ties
with Vladimir Putin’s Russia. On Syrian
refugees Mr Mélenchon and Mr Macron

The Economist Apr il 22nd 2017

stand together, urging France to be more
welcoming; Mr Fillon and Ms Le Pen
would keep the door shut. The two on the
right were against the legalisation of gay
marriage in 2013, with Mr Macron and Mr
Mélenchon in favour. The only two candi-
dates with no position in common are Mr
Macron and Ms Le Pen.
In general, though, there are two world
views in competition. One is a broadly pro-
European, business-friendly approach,
embodied by Mr Macron and Mr Fillon.
They recognise the need to keep France
open and shrink and adapt its state; at the
moment public-sector spending is 57% of
GDP, higher than any other euro-zone
country bar Finland. The other is a protec-
tionist, high-spending, anti-market Euros-
cepticism, pushed in its left-wing, anti-
American version by Mr Mélenchon, and
in its xenophobic, anti-immigration brand
by Ms Le Pen. Génération Libre, a liberal
think-tank, gives Mr Fillon and Mr Macron
a 60% “liberal” rating: all the other candi-
dates get less than 34%.
Mr Macron and Mr Fillon agree on a ba-
sic premise: that, over the past ten years,
France has lost economic ground to Ger-
many that it must regain. Its GDP has
grown more slowly. Its unemployment
rate, at 10%, is more than twice as high. And
its government budget, which Germany
balances, has been in deﬁcit since 1975. 
To set this right they oﬀer variations on
reformist themes, promising to free up en-
terprise, lighten the weight of the state, en-
courage job creation, reward risk and im-
prove education. Mr Fillon talks a more
ambitious game, especially when it comes
to shrinking the state. He vows to end the
35-hour week, slash the 3,000-page labour
code to just 150 pages, abolish the annual
levy on property and ﬁnancial assets over
€1.3m, cut 500,000 civil-service 
jobs
(about 9% of the total) and reduce public
spending by €100 billion over his ﬁve-year
term. 
Mr Macron’s plans are more modest: he
proposes to cut 120,000 public-sector jobs
and cut €60 billion from annual spending.
Rather than removing the 35-hour working
week, Mr Macron wants to weaken it by
devolving negotiations over working time
to ﬁrms. Rather than abolishing the wealth
tax, he wants to limit its eﬀect by applying
it only to property. Overall, Mr Fillon vows
to reduce the state’s spending to 50% of
GDP by 2022; Mr Macron to 52%.
“What this economy needs is urgent
measures, and a clear signal on day one,”
argues Henri de Castries, formerly head of
AXA, an insurer, and part of Mr Fillon’s in-
ner circle. Mr Macron prefers a progressive
approach, based less on the immediate
tightening of existing rules than on a lon-
ger-term rethink of the state. “A ﬁve-year
term cannot consist of six months of brutal
reform followed by U-turns,” argues Jean
Pisani-Ferry, his economic adviser. 

1

18 Br ieﬁng The French election

2

A good example of the two candidates’
diﬀerences is pension reform. Mr Fillon
wants to raise the retirement age from 62
years to 65. Mr Macron would keep it as it is
and concentrate on a longer term but, he
claims, deeper reform which the Fillon
team sees as unrealistic: unifying France’s
anemone-like pension system, made up of
35 diﬀerent public regimes, into a single
structure with universal transparent rules.
He says providing people with the security
they need to move from job to job would
give the economy a long-term boost.
Given France’s pesky tendency to resist
change, even after voting for it, a key ques-
tion is whether either candidate would be
able to put his plans into practice. The
tweedy Mr Fillon, who lives in a grand
manor house complete with a chapel and
a horse, would be the more polarising ﬁg-
ure, likely to provoke strikes and street
protests—though his team insists that, if he
can resist the popular outrage at the sala-
ries he has paid to his family, he can face
down the streets on matters of policy, too.
If elected he would stand a decent chance
of securing a majority at the parliamentary
elections to be held in June. 
The same cannot be said for sure about
Mr Macron. He claims he can secure a ma-
jority, promising that En Marche! will put
up candidates in all 577 constituencies;
half, he says, will be new recruits to poli-
tics—the party has already received some
14,000 applications—and half will be dep-
uties and local councillors who will leave
their old parties. In reality he may well
need to seek a cross-party coalition in or-
der to govern. This is an idea alien to na-
tional French politics, although, as Benja-
min Griveaux, a co-founder of En Marche!,
points out, it is fairly familiar at other lev-
els. Gérard Collomb, a Macron-supporting
Socialist who runs the city of Lyon, for in-
stance, is backed by an alliance reaching
from the left to the centre-right. 

This election campaign, however, has
not been about contrasting rival versions
of reformist economic policy and the likeli-
hood of their practical implementation.
With 11 candidates it has at times felt more
like reality television. Comic one-liners,
memorable slogans and clips of blunders
have dominated social media. When Mr
Fillon argued during a debate that industri-
al relations should be decentralised to
ﬁrms, the quick-witted Mr Mélenchon re-
torted: “I’m not in favour of one labour
code per ﬁrm, just as I am not in favour of
one highway code per road.”
This mood has seemed to play into the
hands of those with binary messages, no-
tably Ms Le Pen (no to Europe; yes to
France) and Mr Mélenchon (quit NATO;
end war on Russia). Mr Macron has found
himself the victim of merciless satire over
his neither-left-nor-right politics, giving
rise to the hashtag #EnMêmeTemps (#At-
TheSameTime) as a dig at his perceived
ambiguity. “You’ve spoken for seven min-
utes, and I have no idea what you said,” Ms
Le Pen told him during one debate. “Every
time you talk, you say a bit of this, a bit of
that, and never decide.”
It is the 65-year-old Mr Mélenchon, a
former Trotskyist, who has emerged as the
campaign’s revelation, using technology
to make his old-school socialism hip in a
campaign modelled on that of Bernie
Sanders in last year’s American primaries.
Mr Mélenchon’s YouTube channel has a
huge following; the beaming “hologram”
through which he addresses rallies from a
distance has been a hit with the crowds as
well as a source of quips for other candi-
dates. He has also launched a popular on-
line video game, Fiscal Kombat, which fea-
tures his character shaking down men in
suits to empty cash from their pockets.
A former Socialist senator, Mr Mélen-
chon is in some ways an odd sort of revolu-
tionary. He confesses to a fondness for qui-

Four-way street

Probability* of outcomes of the French presidential election, to Apr il 19th 2017

Top 4 candidates

% polling average

2

Chances of
reaching second round

(two candidates go through)

Chances of
second-round matchup

Chances of
becoming president

Emmanuel
Macron

En Marche!

69/100

62%

Macron v Le Pen

41/100

38%

Mar ine Le Pen

National Front

63/100

58%

Macron v Mélenchon

25/100

42%

Jean-Luc
Mélenchon

Unsubmissive France

35/100

François Fillon

Republicans

33/100

57%

Fillon v Le Pen

22/100

43%

58%

Mélenchon v Fillon

10/100

42%

68/100

Macron

21/100

Fillon

10/100

1/100

Mélenchon
Le Pen

Sources: National polls;
Jennings & Wlezien; The Economist

*Probabilities are der ived from a model based on The Economist's poll of polls and histor ical 
data; second-round polling averages are from head-to-head results in the poll of polls

Methodology: Read how we arr ived at these probabilities at Economist.com/FR17method

The Economist Apr il 22nd 2017

noa salads, and owns a big ﬂat in Paris as
well as a country pad. Yet in a country with
a romantic fascination for revolutionary
talk, his pugnacious style and crowd-pleas-
ing promises carry a nostalgic appeal. As
well as promising to bust the EU’s deﬁcit
rules by spending an extra €170 billion of
public money over ﬁve years and to pull
France out of NATO, the Communist-
backed candidate vows to share work by
moving to a four-day week and to bring in
a top tax rate of 100% for those earning over
€400,000. He has a particular weakness
for Latin American dictators, and plans to
join the “Bolivarian” alliance, alongside
Venezuela and Cuba; “France”, he says, “is
not a Western country.” 
That he can be a remotely serious con-
tender for the presidency shows the
depths of the country’s political disillu-
sion, particularly among the young. Youth
unemployment of 25% marks France oﬀ
from Britain, where younger voters sided
with the establishment on Brexit. In France
Mr Mélenchon and Ms Le Pen have been
the preferred candidates of the under 25s,
though polls now show Ms Le Pen losing
ground and Mr Macron rising fast.

Battleﬁeld memories
In judging the choices before them, ﬁrst-
time voters have no personal basis for
comparison. Those running the main-
stream candidates’ campaigns, though,
do—and as a result feel a deep sense of his-
toric responsibility. Already the faint pos-
sibility of a run-oﬀ between Mr Mélen-
chon and Ms Le Pen has prompted a
nervous widening of market spreads be-
tween French and German bonds. In the
more likely scenarios where one or other
of them faces either Mr Macron or Mr Fil-
lon and loses, the victor would have a
weakened mandate for reform, owing his
victory as much to those voting to keep out
a populist alternative as to support for his
own policies. Though no recent polls have
shown Ms Le Pen beating any of the other
candidates in the second round, one has
suggested that Mr Mélenchon might beat
Mr Fillon. 
Back in Strasbourg, where En Marche!
volunteers are clambering up stairwells
and knocking on doors, the campaigns’ ri-
val aspirations carry particular symbol-
ism. The city lies in Alsace, a borderland
scarred—like the Somme—by war between
Germany and France; Mr Studer’s grandfa-
thers fought on opposite sides. Pro-Euro-
pean feeling here has deep roots. Yet just
50km away, in the village of Monswiller,
over 1,000 locals recently turned out to
hear Ms Le Pen, chanting what has become
her supporters’ xenophobic battle cry, “On
est chez nous” (“This is our home”). It is a
chilling reminder that, if Mr Macron wins,
he will not only make history. He will also
need to heal, and reform, a country that
history has deeply divided. 7

Asia

The Economist Apr il 22nd 2017 19

Also in this section
20 The race for governor of Jakarta
21 A lynching in Pakistan
21 Vietnamese naval diplomacy
22 Author itar ianism in Japan
24 Banyan: Asia’s beleaguered
migrator y birds

North Korea

Strategic confusion

S E O U L

America stokes tensions on the Korean peninsula, then tries to lower them again
MUCH of the language used by Mike
South Korea’s most popular search engine.
Pence, America’s vice-president, on
Mr Trump’s typically grandiose claim that
his three-day trip to South Korea this week
he was “sending an armada” to nearby wa-
was familiar: America stands “shoulder-
ters added to local fears of an April crisis
to-shoulder” with South Korea in an alli-
for the Korean peninsula.
ance that is a “linchpin” for peace, he said;
Tensions were already high because the
its commitment to its ally is “ironclad”. The
month is full of the sort of patriotic holi-
partnership, Mr Pence insisted, will be
days that North Korea has in the past
stronger under Donald Trump than under
marked with tests of missiles or nuclear de-
his predecessor, Barack Obama.
vices. On April 13th, in the ﬁrst televised de-
The vice-president’s trip provided a lit-
bate ahead of South Korea’s presidential
tle reassurance to South Korean oﬃcials,
election next month, candidates were
who have been feeling queasy about Mr
asked how they would respond to a pre-
Trump’s pronouncements. He once threat-
emptive American strike on North Korea.
ened to bring home the 28,000-odd Ameri-
In Japan the prime minister’s security
can troops that have been stationed in
council discussed plans to evacuate its
South Korea for decades to guard against a
60,000-odd citizens from South Korea.
North Korean attack. More recently Mr
Trump seemed to be contemplating a pre-
emptive strike on North Korea, prompting
a frenzy of speculation in the South Korean
media about whether he was serious. The
local press is now worrying about “Korea
passing”—the idea that America and China
will strike a deal on North Korea without
consulting the South.
Unease spiked on April 9th as reports
emerged that an American ﬂotilla led by
the USS Carl Vinson, an aircraft-carrier, had
been ordered to sail north from Singapore,
instead of proceeding with a scheduled
trip to Australia. “North Korea”, “aircraft-
carrier” and “Carl Vinson” promptly ap-
peared in the top ten queries on Naver,

All at sea
Yet it later emerged that on April 15th, as
North Korea marked the 105th anniversary
of the birth of its founder, Kim Il Sung, the
Carl Vinson had in fact been in Indonesian
waters, over 3,000 miles from the Korean
peninsula. The revelation added to mount-
ing confusion about American intentions
in the region: the day before NBC, an Amer-
ican news outlet, had reported that Mr
Trump was prepared to attack if a nuclear
test seemed imminent. The White House
quickly denied the report. 
In the end, North Korea marked the
holiday with the launch of a missile that
exploded soon after take-oﬀ (although

For daily analysis and debate on Asia, visit
Economist.com/asia

preparations near a nuclear site suggest an
atomic test may still be imminent). At a cel-
ebratory parade, the regime also showed
oﬀ what appeared to be two new canister
launchers for
intercontinental ballistic
missiles. It has said it is on the verge of per-
fecting a missile that can threaten the con-
tinental United States, although most ex-
perts believe this is an exaggeration. Han
Song Ryol, North Korea’s deputy foreign
minister, promised “all-out war”, including
a pre-emptive nuclear strike, if America
threatened North Korea.
An American attack has always seemed
unlikely, given the destruction a rekindling
of war on the peninsula would inevitably
cause. Some estimates put casualties in
greater Seoul, South Korea’s capital, as high
as 130,000 within the ﬁrst two hours of
combat, even assuming that only conven-
tional weapons are used. North Korea
would also suﬀer devastating losses.
Mr Pence (pictured) promised “seam-
less co-operation” and “watertight collabo-
ration” with whichever candidate wins
South Korea’s election—and all of them
would ﬁercely oppose a pre-emptive
strike. But the two liberal front-runners
have recently been striking a more hawk-
ish tone: both seem to be coming around to
the deployment of a missile-defence sys-
tem known as THAAD (Terminal High-Alti-
tude Area Defence) which was ﬁrst agreed
to under Mr Obama, and which they had
previously pledged to review.
American oﬃcials, including Mr Pence
this week, have made it clear that the poli-
cy of “strategic patience” favoured by the
Obama administration in dealing with
North Korea is ending. But it is not clear
what will replace it. Mr Pence noted while
in Seoul that “the world had witnessed the
strength” of Mr Trump’s punitive strike in
Syria and his use of a massive bomb in Af-

1

20 Asia

2 ghanistan, and suggested that North Korea
would “do well not to test his resolve”.
Yet the previous day H.R. McMaster, Mr
Trump’s national security adviser, had
said that all actions should be undertaken
“short of military options”. These are said
to include a global ban on North Korea’s
state airline, Air Koryo, as well as the black-
listing of Chinese ﬁrms doing business
with sanctioned entities by getting banks
to stop dealing with them—“secondary
sanctions” that Mr Obama authorised last
year, but used only timidly. Mr Trump said
on Twitter that he oﬀered China commer-
cial inducements, and would not label it a
currency manipulator, because it was
helping with North Korea.
If Mr Trump’s new policy is to sow con-
fusion and roil the region, in short, it is
working well. Otherwise, it’s a mess. 7

The race for governor of Jakarta

Division in
diversity

J A K A R T A

A tense election leaves many worried
about the future of pluralism
THE mood in Jakarta was jittery in the
days leading up to its gubernatorial
election on April 19th. Around 64,000 po-
lice, soldiers and other security personnel
were deployed to keep the peace. At least
one policeman guarded every one of the
13,000-odd polling stations. 
Islamist agitators implied the incum-
bent governor, Basuki Tjahaja Purnama,
known as Ahok, was planning to steal the
election, and threatened to ﬂood the city
with supporters to safeguard the vote.
They accused Ahok, who is both Christian
and of Chinese ancestry, of “Christianis-
ing” Jakarta because, to some paranoid
minds, a mosque built by the city govern-
ment resembles a cross. A Facebook user
claimed the gang rape and murder of
Ahok’s supporters would not be sinful.
Anxious
ethnic-Chinese, 
in 
turn,
shared posts warning that the election of
Ahok’s rival, Anies Baswedan, would lead
to the forcible imposition of Islamic law.
“People are saying, ‘Behave yourself, or
we’ll make another May 1998,’” said one
Chinese Christian Jakartan—referring to
the month when deadly pogroms against
Chinese broke out across the city.
The head of Nahdlatul Ulama, Indone-
sia’s biggest Muslim social organisation,
with 60m members, appeared hand-in-
hand with leaders of Indonesia’s ﬁve other
oﬃcially recognised faiths to appeal for un-
ity and peace. Joko Widodo, Indonesia’s
president, universally known as Jokowi,
voiced support for “the principle of live
and let live, as well as unity in diversity”

(the latter phrase being Indonesia’s nation-
al motto). Banners urging “A safe and
peaceful election” and proclaiming “We
are all brothers” ﬂapped above intersec-
tions all around the city.
In the end, the election passed oﬀ
peacefully. Unoﬃcial counts showed Mr
Baswedan, Jokowi’s former minister for
education, easily beat Ahok, with around
58% of the vote—a far wider margin of vic-
tory than opinion polls had predicted.
Ahok had won an automatic promotion
from vice-governor to governor when Jo-
kowi, his predecessor, was elected presi-
dent. He would have been the ﬁrst Chinese
Christian to win the job in an election. In
the end, however, a row about religion up-
ended his campaign.
Ahok had been popular, having waged
war on Jakarta’s corrupt and idle bureau-
crats and laboured manfully to improve its
infrastructure. His election seemed secure.
But early in the campaign he gave a speech
in which he urged voters not to heed those
who used a particular verse from the Ko-
ran to argue that Muslims should not vote
for Christians. Hardline Islamists, who had
attacked Ahok for his race and religion
since he became governor in 2014, edited
the speech to make it sound as if he was
criticising the Koran. The doctored video,
disseminated widely on social media, suc-
ceeded in creating the desired uproar. 
The agitators organised massive anti-
Ahok rallies. In November prosecutors
charged Ahok with blasphemy. The charge
may be tendentious, but the potential pen-
alty is severe: up to ﬁve years in prison. For
nearly six months Ahok has spent every
Tuesday in court, with conviction a genu-
ine threat: very few of those charged with
blasphemy are acquitted.
Mr Baswedan, a politician as slippery
and accommodating as Ahok is blunt and
forceful, spied an opening. On January 1st
he spoke at the headquarters of the thug-
gish Islam Defenders Front (FPI), a vigilan-

The Economist Apr il 22nd 2017

te group. Mr Baswedan denies pandering
to radicals: he says he visited just to “an-
swer questions”, and to quell rumours that
he is a Shia (most Indonesian Muslims are
Sunni; Shias have been prosecuted as “de-
viants”). But he said nothing to counter
FPI’s vituperative attacks on Ahok, and lat-
er joined its rabble-rousing leader, Rizieq
Shihab, for prayers before a big anti-Ahok
rally. The iconography of Mr Baswedan’s
campaign was also clear: throughout the
campaign he sported a black peci—a cap
worn by pious Javanese.
In the wake of his victory, Mr Baswedan
made all the right noises, pledging to de-
fend diversity. But he celebrated in the
company of Mr Shihab, once again. His vic-
tory undoubtedly strengthens the hard-
liners who backed him. Marcus Mietzner
of the Australian National University wor-
ries that the chauvinists have demon-
strated “the capacity to shift a small but de-
cisive segment of swing voters their way.”
What is more, he adds, “it demonstrates
that militant Islamists have become more
organised, established better connections
with…elite networks, and have found
ways of building alliances with main-
stream politicians.”
That will alarm Jokowi. Mr Baswedan
had the backing of Prabowo Subianto,
whom Jokowi defeated in 2014 and who is
widely expected to challenge him again at
the next presidential election, in 2019. San-
diaga Uno, Mr Baswedan’s running-mate,
says Mr Prabowo insisted that he and Mr
Baswedan sign “a binding agreement” to
stay in their new jobs for a full term, in ef-
fect excluding them from the next presi-
dential election. But the governorship was
a springboard to the presidency for Jokowi,
and Mr Prabowo may yet tap one of the
pair as his running-mate.
Mr Baswedan is not about to impose Is-
lamic law in Jakarta. But hardline forces
certainly helped him win. That genie is not
easily returned to the bottle. 7

How would God vote?

The Economist Apr il 22nd 2017 

Asia 21

Vietnamese naval diplomacy

Dock and cover

C A M R A N H B A Y

noises about solving disputes bilaterally,
as China prefers. But for Vietnam, the
underlying problem is unchanged: how
does a small, poor country defend itself
against a bigger, richer one?
The Philippines, under Rodrigo Du-
terte, has pioneered one approach: appar-
ent capitulation. In exchange for massive
investment in infrastructure, Mr Duterte
has decided not to press China over their
territorial dispute. Vietnam, using Cam
Ranh Bay, is trying something else: diver-
siﬁcation. Since the foreign-vessel facility
opened a year ago, it has received 19 ships
from 10 countries. China and America tie
for the most visits, at three each. But
every other visit save one has come from
countries that have shown some form of
opposition to China’s expansive mar-
itime claims, including France and Japan.
Vietnam appears to be reminding China
of just how many friends and suitors it
has—and just how well it can look after
their warships.

Vietnam attempts a delicate strategic balancing act
NEAR the point where Vietnam bulges
deepest into the South China Sea lies
Cam Ranh Bay, perhaps the ﬁnest natural
deepwater harbour in South-East Asia.
France based a ﬂeet there in colonial
times. Russian ships made use of it in the
Russo-Japanese war, Japanese ones
during the second world war and Ameri-
can ones during the Vietnam war.
After the American withdrawal and
communist triumph, the government of
the newly reunited Vietnam leased the
naval base to the Soviet Union. Russia
gave up the facility in 2002. Today it is
Russian tourists who ﬂock to Cam Ranh
International Airport, with its American-
built airstrip, on their way to the beaches
of nearby Nha Trang. 
These days Vietnam ostensibly fol-
lows a policy of “Three Nos”: no military
alliances, no foreign bases and no joining
with another country to ﬁght a third.
Nonetheless, adjacent to the Vietnamese
naval base at Cam Ranh is a facility that
receives foreign military vessels. In the-
ory it is a purely commercial venture,
open to the ships of any country willing
to pay for the maintenance and refuelling
it provides. But it also serves a strategic
purpose: sending a deﬁant message to a
resurgent and expansionist China by
allowing Vietnam to strengthen military
ties with an increasingly diverse group of
countries.
Anti-Chinese sentiment runs deep
among ordinary Vietnamese. Vietnam
fought wars against both America and
China in the 1970s. But these days Ameri-
cans, by and large, are received with
aﬀection, whereas many Vietnamese
remain convinced that China still has
territorial designs on their country.
In 2014 China sent an oil rig to a dis-
puted part of the South China Sea, spark-
ing anti-Chinese riots in Vietnam. Since
then both sides have been careful not to
stoke tensions. China has called oﬀ the
drilling; Vietnam has made mollifying

Diplomacy by other means

blasphemy killing in Khyber Pakhtun-
khwa province. It was also the ﬁrst blas-
phemy killing at a university. Before this,
the most horriﬁc such attack had involved
villagers who burned a Christian couple in
a brick kiln in 2014. That well-oﬀ and liter-
ate young men were responsible for Mr
Khan’s murder troubles many Pakistanis.
Dawn, a liberal newspaper, lamented that
a “cancer” aﬄicting Pakistan had even
reached a place where “minds are sup-
posed to be enlightened”. 

Allegations of blasphemy are often
made by those with other grievances
against the accused: the charge can be used
as an excuse to knock oﬀ a business rival or
someone who causes the accuser trouble.
Three days before Mr Khan’s death, he had
alleged that some members of the univer-
sity’s staﬀ were corrupt. Several of them,
who have links with the Awami National
Party, a secular Pushtun group which con-
trols the university, have been arrested in
connection with Mr Khan’s death. 

1

A lynching in Pakistan

Places of darkness

I S L A M A B A D

The “blasphemy killing” of a student is
a sign of rising intolerance on campuses
IN THE room of Mashal Khan, a student at
Abdul Wali Khan University in Mardan,
a dusty town in north-west Pakistan, the
late occupant’s handwriting is on almost
every surface. Some of his scribblings in
felt-tip pen are banal (“You beauty”) or
crude (“Get your burger-ﬂipping ass outta
here”). But many hint at an idealistic and
ﬁercely independent young mind: “Free-
dom is the right of every individual” and
“Be crazy, curious and mad!” These were
injunctions that Mr Khan, a journalism stu-
dent, upheld—and that got him killed. 
On April 13th Mr Khan was pulled from
the room by a crowd of fellow students.
The violence that followed, partially re-
corded on a mobile phone, was staggering-
ly brutal. The attackers shot Mr Khan twice,
dragged his corpse through hallways, beat
it with planks and stripped it naked. 
Earlier in the day a fellow journalism
student had accused Mr Khan of blasphe-
my. That allegation appears to have trig-
gered the attack. The penalty for blasphe-
my under Pakistani law is death. But it is
increasingly common that vigilantes take
the law into their own hands before courts
get involved. At least 65 people have been
murdered by mobs for allegedly insulting
Islam since 1990. As often in such cases,
there was no evidence against Mr Khan,
apart from the claims of the classmate who
denounced him, Wajahat, a disgruntled
young man with a fondness for the blood-
curdling rhetoric of Islamist televangelists.
Mr Khan’s murder was the ﬁrst mob

22 Asia

2

The participation of so many students
in Mr Khan’s murder is a sign of growing re-
ligious intolerance on campuses. Paki-
stan’s Islamist parties have been fanning
the ﬂames of it: since the assassination in
2011 of Salman Taseer, a governor of Pun-
jab who had pushed for reform of blasphe-
my laws, support for the current ones ap-
pears only to have grown. 
Student organisations sympathetic to
the Islamists have taken up the cause. They
often wield the threat of a blasphemy alle-
gation in order to browbeat university de-
partments into scrapping courses in music
or comparative religion. A liberal lecturer
at Bahauddin Zakariya University in the
city of Multan was accused of blasphemy
in 2013 by Islamist undergraduates; he re-
mains in jail. His ﬁrst lawyer was assassi-
nated by unknown assailants.

Alarmingly, it took two days for the
prime minister, Nawaz Sharif, to condemn
Mr Khan’s murder. He has helped to stoke
hysteria about blasphemy himself: a few
weeks ago he ordered police to hunt for
blasphemous content on social media. In
the eyes of Huma Yusuf, a columnist, blas-
phemy-related violence is now a more in-
tractable problem in Pakistan than terro-
rism. A campaign against militant groups
has sharply reduced deaths from terro-
rism. But, as Ms Yusuf notes: “You can’t use
the same tactics with the entire popula-
tion.” What is needed is better teaching in
schools, religious and secular alike, about
the evils of vigilante justice; a government
that is far quicker to condemn it; and, cru-
cially, legal change. Bringing any of that
about will be hard: cases like Mr Khan’s
show all too clearly the perils involved. 7

Author itar ianism in Japan

Nabbing imaginary terrorists

T O K Y O

A new bill continues a worrying trend toward stronger state powers
FOR several weeks Japan’s Diet has been
the ruling Liberal Democratic Party (LDP)
debating a law that would punish peo-
suspect ulterior motives. “The need for a
ple who plan to commit crimes. The gov-
new law is very small but the dangers of
ernment says the conspiracy bill will pro-
having the law are enormous,” says Ta-
tect the nation from terrorism. In a country
keshi Shina of the Democratic Party, the
where crime has fallen to a record low (a
main opposition. Passage of the bill, he ar-
single fatal shooting was recorded for the
gues, will lead to an erosion of personal
whole of 2015) and where the last big terro-
liberty: “The government is far more pas-
rist attack was more than 20 years ago, that
sionate about the freedom of the state to
justiﬁcation sounds feeble to many. 
act than about protecting the constitution-
Japan’s federation of bar associations
al rights of the individual.” 
questions whether the police need more
To be fair, the LDP, which has domin-
powers. It says they can use existing laws
ated Japanese politics for 60 years, has nev-
to pursue criminal conspiracies. Critics of
er hidden its authoritarian streak. It wants

The Economist Apr il 22nd 2017

to do away with the liberal constitution
imposed by Japan’s American occupiers in
1947. It dislikes the way the document re-
nounces war, diminishes the status of the
emperor and makes ringing declarations
about the inviolability of fundamental hu-
man rights.
A draft of an alternative constitution
endorsed by the LDP tosses out these ideas
and replaces them with duties to the state.
The national anthem and ﬂag must be re-
spected. Rights come with “responsibil-
ities and obligations” and citizens “must
comply with the public interest and public
order”. Freedom of speech can be restrict-
ed if it impedes that. Most alarmingly, says
Lawrence Repeta of Meiji University, the
prime minister would be empowered to
declare a national emergency under “an
extremely broad and undeﬁned range of
potential circumstances”. Mr Repeta con-
siders the document a blueprint for the ab-
olition of Japan’s liberal democracy.
Privately, some LDP politicians accept
that the draft, written by hardliners while
the party was brieﬂy in the political wil-
derness, goes too far. “Nobody takes it seri-
ously,” says Tsuneo Watanabe of the Sasa-
kawa Peace Foundation, a think-tank. If the
party really intended to sell the draft to vot-
ers, he says, it would have produced a
more appealing document. The LDP’s tilt
rightwards since returning to power in
2012, however, suggests that the draft in-
creasingly inﬂuences public policy. 
Last year a UN special rapporteur criti-
cised the government of Shinzo Abe for
trying to intimidate the media by making a
pointed reference to its power to shut
down “biased” television channels under
the law that regulates broadcasting. In 2013
the LDP pushed through a law that allows
the government to declare all kinds of in-
formation state secrets, in spite of strong
public opposition and noisy protests by
journalists, lawyers and scholars. In the-
ory, the law will help deepen co-operation
on security between Japan and America,
which had complained about a series of
leaks of sensitive information. In practice,
it has raised fears that seeking or revealing
data about perfectly legitimate subjects,
such as the extent of contamination from
the Fukushima nuclear disaster, could be
construed as criminal activity.
Few in the LDP want to return to the
past, insists Yoshimasa Hayashi, an LDP
MP, although he does concede that some
want to tug it “too far right.” Still, he sup-
ports the conspiracy law, which he says
will help keep the Tokyo Olympics in 2020
safe. The LDP’s dominance of both cham-
bers of the Diet means the law will proba-
bly pass without trouble. It is the lack of a
strong opposition that should most worry
ordinary Japanese, says Mr Shina. The LDP
may not be too worried about constraints
on the power of the state, but in a healthy
democracy, someone should be. 7

24 Asia

The Economist Apr il 22nd 2017

Banyan

Canaries in the coal fumes

Spare a thought for Asia’s 50m migrating waterbirds

sea, into which the Yellow river ﬂows, has lost over 35% of interti-
dal habitat since the early 1980s. An especially destructive mo-
ment was the run-up to the Beijing Olympics of 2008, for which a
lot of heavy industry was moved from the capital to the coast.
Xianji Wen, who, like Ms Leung, works for the WWF, de-
scribes the Yellow sea as a “bottleneck” for the whole ﬂyway: so
many waders pass through it that the loss of habitat there is par-
ticularly consequential. Four-ﬁfths of Asia’s red knots, having
wintered in Australasia, stop on their way north at one spot,
Luannan, east of Beijing. The bar-tailed godwit ﬂies non-stop
from New Zealand to the Yellow sea—over 6,000km. After recov-
ering there, the species ﬂies non-stop again to its breeding
grounds in the extreme north of Russia.
Populations of both species have crashed by over a third,
probably because of coastal development. On the eastern side of
the Yellow sea in South Korea, a huge reclamation scheme involv-
ing the world’s longest dyke destroyed Saemangeum, a 400
square kilometre tidal estuary. The 330,000 shorebirds that used
to use the area did not move to other staging sites—there is a limit
to how many birds even rich mudﬂats can support. Most simply
died. In 2010 the IUCN reclassiﬁed the great knot from a species of
“least concern” to “vulnerable”, thanks largely to that dyke. It
might also prove the death knell of the spoon-billed sandpiper.
The reclamation scheme, meanwhile, is doing far less for the local
economy than its backers promised it would.
There is a silver lining, however. The vast middle class created
by the region’s breakneck growth is becoming interested in con-
servation. Hong Kong has long had plenty of birdwatchers, and
schoolchildren throng Mai Po’s education centre. In Taiwan a
conservation movement was spawned by another critically en-
dangered species, the black-faced spoonbill. In the 1980s its num-
bers fell to fewer than 300. It bred on a few islands at the western
end of the Korean peninsula’s demilitarised zone and wintered at
three sites: Mai Po, the Red river delta in Vietnam and Chiku in
Taiwan. Taiwanese bird lovers ﬁrst secured an end to hunting at
Chiku and then, in 2000, fought oﬀ plans for a steel reﬁnery. The
spoonbill population has since grown to around 3,800—proof
that it is possible to rescue species from the verge of extinction.

Binoculars to the rescue
In China several hundred birdwatchers gather for the spring mi-
gration by the Yellow Sea near the North Korean border. And Mr
Wen says that local governments in China increasingly take pride
in the acclaim they win for conservation schemes—several work
with the WWF. A year ago China and New Zealand even signed
an agreement—an “air bridge” between the two countries—to
protect the habitat of the bar-tailed godwits, whose annual de-
parture, Maori mythology holds, is for the homeland of the an-
cestors who ﬁrst colonised New Zealand.
South Korea’s conservation movement is feeble. But the gov-
ernment of North Korea, by failing to develop the country, has in-
advertently preserved a greater share of valuable waterbird habi-
tats. It recently agreed to designate one as a protected site under
the “Ramsar” international convention on wetlands—a rare in-
stance of North Korea being drawn into international co-opera-
tion. Some even hope this innocuous step may prove habit-form-
ing, paving the way for co-operation on trickier issues. After all,
30 years ago, Chinese and Russian conservationists helped thaw
frosty relations between their two countries. Asia’s beleaguered
waterbirds might be diplomatic as well as zoological treasures. 7

KATHERINE LEUNG was hunting for birds—black-tailed god-
wits to be precise. Armed with a wide net, she stood at dusk
amid the Mai Po Marshes, a wide expanse of mudﬂats, man-
groves and shrimp ponds on Hong Kong’s border with mainland
China, trying to nab a couple of birds as they came to roost after
feeding. In her pocket were two tiny and expensive radio trans-
mitters. An employee of the World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF),
which manages Mai Po, she was hoping to aﬃx them to the backs
of two godwits heading north for the summer. By the time she
gave up, at midnight, she had not caught any godwits, but she had
snared three gorgeous greater painted snipe. She had also spotted
an eagle owl out hunting and a leopard cat prowling nearby. She
will be hunting herself again soon, as the godwits’ twice-yearly
transit reaches its peak.
Astonishingly little is known about the godwits that arrive at
Mai Po in full breeding plumage at this time of year—neither
where exactly in the warmer parts of Asia they have wintered
nor where, in the far north, they will breed. Most of the world’s
migratory waterbirds barrel up and down one of eight big north-
south “ﬂyways”. The East Asian-Australasian Flyway, along
which Mai Po is located, is the most rich in species. This spring
50m waterbirds will move from their winter homes in South-East
Asia, Australia and New Zealand to their breeding grounds in
Russia, Mongolia, northern China, the Korean peninsula, Japan
and even Alaska. They rely on intertidal ﬂats like those at Mai Po,
teeming with nourishing molluscs, worms and crustaceans, as
well as plants, to supply the food that fuels their journeys. 
Of the eight big ﬂyways, the East Asian-Australasian is also the
one displaying the sharpest decline in the number of birds. Of its
155-odd waterbird species, at least 24 are now globally threatened.
They include the diminutive spoon-billed sandpiper, a wader
whose numbers are down to fewer than 200 pairs.
Transiting one of the world’s most dynamic industrial regions
is clearly taking a toll. Asia’s migratory waterbirds face immense
pressures, from hunting, pollution, ingested plastic and competi-
tion from aquaculture. But the biggest disaster is the destruction
of coastal way-stations like Mai Po. Since 1950 China has lost over
half its coastal wetlands to “reclamation”. According to the Inter-
national Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN), the Yellow

China

The Economist Apr il 22nd 2017 25

Also in this section
26 Bikes are back

Climate change

No cooling

B E I J I N G

Donald Trump’s indiﬀerence to climate change has not changed China’s view
RESIDENTS have found something else
greenhouse gases appears to have lost faith
to blame for the toxic smog that envel-
in the cause? Fortunately, there is no sign
ops many Chinese cities for much of the
that China, the biggest emitter, is wavering. 
year. Until recently the culprits that were
There was a time when it might have.
usually ﬁngered were the obvious ones:
Less than a decade ago China was dragging
emissions from coal-ﬁred power plants, ex-
its feet, believing that the West was trying
haust fumes from cars and dust from build-
to use climate change as an excuse to im-
ing sites. This year, however, reports began
pose policies that would harm China’s
to appear in state-run media that climate
economy. In 2009 China’s intransigence
was one of the main reasons why UN-led
change is now reckoned to be a factor, too.
Chinese scientists say that in eastern Chi-
climate-change talks in Copenhagen failed
na global warming is resulting in less rain
to make much progress. But by the time of
the UN’s climate-change conference in Par-
and wind to clear the pollutants. The gov-
ernment’s weather bureau illustrated its
is in 2015, much had changed. Li Shuo, a
online account of the discovery with a pic-
Beijing-based policy adviser for Green-
ture of zombie-looking ﬁgures in hazmat
peace, says China was one of the “major
suits shrouded by haze. 
driving forces” behind the consensus that
America’s president, Donald Trump,
may have little interest in climate change:
Wilbur Ross, his commerce secretary, said
the subject was “not a major part of the dis-
cussion” when Mr Trump met his Chinese
counterpart, Xi Jinping, at Mar-a-Lago,
Florida, earlier this month. But in China
the government, and increasingly the pub-
lic, see it as a real danger, responsible for
rising sea levels that threaten coastal cities
as well as for aggravating droughts in the
north, ﬂoods in the south and, as it now
turns out, the omnipresent smog. Some
people wonder whether Mr Trump’s indif-
ference might reduce China’s willingness
to take action against climate change. Why
bother if the second-biggest emitter of

Hydro, nuclear
and wind power
Natural gas

China, energy consumption by fuel type

Black stuff down

Source: National Bureau of Statistics

Tonnes of coal equivalent, bn

Petroleum

2000 02 04 06 08

10

12 14

16

3.0

2.5

2.0

Coal

1.5

1.0

0.5

0

For daily analysis and debate on China, visit
Economist.com/china

was forged at the meeting. 
For China’s leaders, the reasons why
they changed their minds remain just as
valid today. Oﬃcials still worry about the
huge build-up of debt and damage to the
environment
that have accompanied
years of breakneck growth (citizens’ com-
plaints about polluted air, water and soil
have been fuelling social unrest). The gov-
ernment now wants the economy to be
less reliant on manufacturing that requires
a lot of polluting energy, and less driven by
massive investment in construction. This
will involve using less coal, which in turn
will help clear the air as well as reduce cli-
mate-changing emissions of carbon. 
The government is spooked by an accu-
mulation of research showing just how
vulnerable the country is to damage
caused by climate change. A study pub-
lished in 2013 by the World Bank and the
OECD concluded that economic losses in
Guangzhou, in southern China, would be
greater than in any other city in the world.
In 2015 the government’s chief meteorolo-
gist warned of “serious threats” to China’s
rivers, food supplies and infrastructure as a
result of global warming, which he said
had been greater than the global average.
China sees diplomatic beneﬁt, too, in
hanging tough on climate change. It talks
of the “soft power” it won by pushing for
the agreement in Paris. Shortly before Mr
Trump’s inauguration in January, Mr Xi
told a gathering of the world’s elite in Da-
vos, Switzerland, that all signatories
should stick to the Paris accord “instead of
walking away from it”—a poke at Mr
Trump that his audience applauded. Also
that month China’s climate envoy, Xie
Zhenhua, ventured that his country was
“capable of taking a leadership role in com-
bating global climate change.” China is re-
luctant to stick its neck out in negotiations 

1

The Economist Apr il 22nd 2017

Several other companies are piling in,
as are investors who believe the ﬁrms have
global potential. Bluegogo was the ﬁrst to
launch overseas, in San Francisco in Febru-
ary. Ofo has recently started services in Sin-
gapore and San Diego, California. It was
due to launch another one in Cambridge,
England, as The Economist went to press.
Mobike, too, is operating in Singapore and
is eyeing other markets.
The dockless system is prone to abuse.
Some riders hide the bikes in or near their
homes to prevent others from using them.
Another trick involves photographing a
bike’s QR code and then scratching it oﬀ to
stop others from scanning it. With the
stored image, the rider can then monopol-
ise the machine. But customers caught mis-
behaving can have points deducted from
their accounts, making it more expensive
for them to rent the bikes. 
A bigger problem for the new ﬁrms is
persuading people to use bikes instead of
cars. Thirty years ago, 63% of Beijingers
pedalled to work. Now only 12% do. Many
people think that cycling is only for the
poor. A dating-show contestant famously
quipped in 2010 that she would “rather cry
in a BMW than smile on a bike.” 
Cycling is also dangerous. About 40% of
road accidents involve bicycles, according
to a report in 2013. (Many bike lanes have
been eliminated to make room for cars.)
Some city authorities accuse the bike-shar-
ing ﬁrms of causing congestion. This
month the southern city of Shenzhen or-
dered limits on the number of shared
bikes. Other cities, including Shanghai and
Beijing, are considering similar measures.
But Chinese leaders like the services—
they represent the kind of green innova-
tion that China says it wants. In January
the prime minister, Li Keqiang, told Mo-
bike’s co-founder that her business model
was “a revolution”. Not, presumably, the
kind that Mao led, but one that would have
made the chairman feel at home with its
profusion of two-wheelers. 7

26 China

2 on global warming, but it enjoys the kudos
of leading by example.
Chinese oﬃcials are blessed by the ab-
sence of a domestic lobby that questions
climate change and its causes. “People gen-
erally see the urgency” of the problem,
says Mr Li of Greenpeace, a lobby group.
But there are powerful vested interests that
resist carbon-cutting measures. Take the
steel industry. It is heavily polluting and a
huge consumer of coal-produced energy.
The central government says it wants to cut
steel production, but some local authori-
ties have been ignoring its orders, partly
because of the risk of protests by laid-oﬀ
workers. Output of the metal still exceeds
domestic demand by about one-seventh,
or 100m tonnes a year.
But the government is succeeding in
cutting the use of coal, which provides
around 70% of China’s electricity. In 2016
coal consumption dropped by 4.7%, the
third successive year of decline (see chart
on previous page). Many experts now be-
lieve it reached its peak in 2013, several
years before even the most optimistic of
them had been predicting. Greenpeace
forecasts that this year will be China’s

fourth successive one with ﬂat or falling
emissions of carbon dioxide. 
China also hopes to proﬁt from devel-
oping green technology that it can sell
globally. It is investing huge sums in it. In
January it announced plans to spend 2.5trn
yuan ($360bn) by 2020 on new generating
capacity using renewable or low-carbon
sources, including solar, wind, hydroelec-
tric and nuclear plants. It says this will
create 13m jobs and mean that half of the
new capacity built between 2016 and 2020
will be renewable or nuclear (although
China’s record in attaching wind and solar
farms to the grid has been less impressive
than its rapid building of them). 
The country is eager to experiment with
other ways of reducing greenhouse gases.
Later this year it plans to launch a nation-
wide carbon-trading scheme, mainly for
heavy industries. It is also mulling the in-
troduction of a carbon tax. The public will
cheer: less carbon spewed into the air
should mean less smog. “We will make our
skies blue again,” pledged the prime minis-
ter, Li Keqiang, last month. He is mindful of
potential unrest if China doesn’t. His re-
solve might help the planet, too. 7

Bicycle shar ing

The return of pedal power

B E I J I N G

pany now has around 2.5m yellow-framed
bikes in more than 50 cities in China. Its
main rival, Mobike, which started up only
a year ago, says it has “several million” of
its orange-wheeled bikes spread across a
similar area. Bluegogo has half a million
bikes in six Chinese cities. It plans to add a
new city every two weeks.

High-tech rental schemes are trying to make cycling cool again
AMAN pedals a brand-new, orange and
silver bicycle to his oﬃce door. He dis-
mounts in the middle of the pavement,
ﬂicks down the kickstand and disappears
inside. A woman approaches and waves
her smartphone over a QR code near the
rear mudguard. The lock snaps open and
oﬀ she rides. These days, China’s once bi-
cycle-clogged streets are choked with cars.
But some urbanites are getting back on two
(motorless) wheels, lured by the ease of us-
ing shared “dockless” bikes controlled by
high-tech gadgetry. 
For years, bike-sharing schemes have
been common in big cities around the
world, including in China. Examples in-
clude Paris’s Vélib and London’s Santan-
der Cycles (“Boris bikes”). But these require
customers to return the bicycles to docking
stations. In China, a more user-friendly ap-
proach is spreading rapidly. It involves
bikes that can be paid for using a smart-
phone and left anywhere. GPS tracking en-
ables them to be located with a mobile
app. A ride typically costs only one yuan
($0.15) on a sleek-framed bike in an eye-
catching colour.
The ﬁrst such service was launched in
June 2015 by a startup called Ofo. The com-

Weighing them up against BMWs

United States

The death penalty

And then there were none

V A R N E R , A R K A N S A S

two each on four nights, beginning with
Mr Davis and Bruce Ward, another convict-
ed murderer. That would have been more
than the rest of the country has performed
so far this year, and almost half of last
year’s national total of 20, which was the
lowest since 1991 (see chart). No state has
executed two people on the same day
since 2000. Arkansas has not executed
anyone at all since 2005. 
Mr Hutchinson’s haste avowedly
stemmed from the trouble that his state,
like others, has faced in carrying out legal
injections, which had seemed a reassur-
ingly hygienic method, just as the electric
chair once did. Because of European ex-
port bans and the reluctance of domestic

A bid to execute eight prisoners at unprecedented speed underlines the diﬃculty of
executing anyone at all
IT WAS 11.15pm at the Cummins Unit, the
facility on the Arkansas plains where
death sentences are supposed to be carried
out, and the clock was ticking. Not in the
usual way, however: rather than the con-
demned man, Don Davis, seeking an emer-
gency stay, on April 17th the state was ask-
ing the Supreme Court in Washington, DC,
to lift one. The death warrant would expire
at midnight; if it did, Arkansas might be un-
able to dispatch Mr Davis for the foresee-
able future. That is because its supply of a
drug it intended to use in a run of eight
back-to-back lethal injections—a glut of ex-
ecutions unprecedented in the modern
era—will soon expire, too.
The journalists who had been ushered
through the electric fences, then past the
watch towers and the incongruous rose
garden, drew lots to decide who would
serve as witnesses. It was unclear whether
there was still time for a legal kill. Finally, at
a quarter to midnight, the justices declined
to lift the stay. Increasingly and chaotically,
a gruesome plan that, had it been realised,
might have suggested a revival of Ameri-
ca’s death penalty, has come instead to
seem further evidence of its anachronism. 
Arkansas has an unhappy history of
multiple executions: in 1923 a man was tak-
en from his coﬃn and put back in the elec-
tric chair after he was found still to be
breathing. Nonetheless, in February Asa
Hutchinson, the state’s governor, sched-
uled eight executions in an 11-day period,

South
Midwest
West
Nor th-east

The softening south

United States, executions by region

Source: Death Penalty Information Centre

100

20

1976

80

85

90

95 2000 05

10

16

0

80

60

40

The Economist Apr il 22nd 2017 27

Also in this section
28 A political near-miss in Georgia
30 Trouble at the border
30 Immigrants and deﬁcits
31 Post oﬃce v pooches
32 The cost of health care
32 Chicago shr inks again
33 Lexington: Far apart on refugees

For daily analysis and debate on Amer ica, visit
Economist.com/unitedstates
Economist.com/blogs/democracyinamer ica

pharmaceutical ﬁrms to be involved, states
have struggled to obtain the drugs they
need. Arkansas is among those to have re-
sorted to unusual shifts, such as importing
a batch from a pharmacy run from the
back of a driving school in London. Like
other states, it has passed rules to cloak its
procurement, which, as elsewhere, led to
more litigation and delays. The supply it ﬁ-
nally secured of midazolam, a sedative, is
supposed to be administered by the end of
April. When a legal opening arose, Mr
Hutchinson issued his warrants.
Quite apart from the oddity of arrang-
ing deaths on the basis of a use-by date, mi-
dazolam is controversial. Critics say it does
not always numb the pain caused by the
other drugs, which prevent breathing and
stop the heart; it came into fashion only
after preferable anaesthetics were with-
drawn. It has been implicated in a series of
excruciatingly botched procedures, includ-
ing one in Arizona in which Dale Baich, a
public defender, saw his client take nearly
two hours to die. It was “by far the most dif-
ﬁcult to watch” of the 12 lethal injections
Mr Baich has attended. Several states have
renounced midazolam; a federal court in
Ohio recently blocked its use (though the
Supreme Court has permitted it). On April
15th a federal court stayed all the Arkansas
executions on the grounds that midazolam
might
indeed lead to unconstitutional
“cruel and unusual” punishment.
That order was reversed on appeal on
the afternoon before Mr Davis and Mr
Ward were meant to die—the judges ruling,
in eﬀect, that their colleague was too
squeamish about the risk of pain. Still, this
bout of litigation over lethal-injection
cocktails was important because of the
role of drug companies, two of which ﬁled
objections to the use of products apparent-
ly procured through middlemen. In sepa-
rate actions in a county court, McKesson, a 

1

28 United States

The Economist Apr il 22nd 2017

2 distributor, accused Arkansas of obtaining
a drug through deception. The original
judge in that case granted a restraining or-
der, then lay down on a mock gurney at a
protest outside the governor’s mansion; he
now faces disciplinary action.
In the end Mr Davis—pictured on the
previous page, top left—was saved by dif-
ferent considerations. The Arkansas Su-
preme Court issued a stay until the federal
one hears a forthcoming case concerning
the right of defendants to enlist indepen-
dent mental-health experts. Mr Ward was
covered both by that and a separate ruling
regarding his competence to be executed
(he hallucinates about dogs at the end of
his bed). A third man, Jason McGehee, slat-
ed to die on April 27th, won a stay after the
parole board recommended clemency.

So many ways to live
“Our country does not participate in mass
executions,” lawyers for the men main-
tained. They may be right. The Arkansas
eight are dwindling. Those remaining have
likewise been convicted of heinous
crimes. On the other hand, say their law-
yers, they too can muster mitigating fac-
tors: childhood abuse, mental disability,
lousy representation at their trials. As The
Economist went to press, Stacey Johnson,
whose execution was to be on April 20th,
had earned a stay to allow him to pursue
DNA testing. After yet another ruling,
McKesson’s complaint oﬀered hope to Le-
dell Lee, who shared Mr Johnson’s death
date and, like him, protests his innocence.
Arkansas’s oﬃcials harrumph about
justice being thwarted. But even if, in some
cases, they prevail, the rigmarole has
shown that there are many sound reasons
not to execute someone. Along with the
myriad legal objections, it has highlighted
the costs to those charged with overseeing
the process. A group of former prison oﬃ-
cials warned the governor that his eight-
kill scheme would impose “unnecessary
stress and trauma” on staﬀ at the Cummins
Unit and increase the risk of a botch. The
state reportedly struggled to ﬁnd enough
citizen witnesses; the prisons chief is said
to have solicited volunteers at a Rotary
Club event. The waning enthusiasm for
the death penalty of another group of lay-
men—juries—is a big factor in its decline.
Mr Davis spent April 17th in a cell oppo-
site the death chamber. He had been there
before, in fact, on another occasion when
his demise was forestalled at the 11th hour.
In the gathering execution-night mood—
part hospital vigil, part crime scene—he
was served a last meal, that ghoulish ritual.
The state gave up its bid to do away with
Mr Ward earlier in the evening, but rela-
tives of both men’s victims were at the pri-
son. They were put “through hell”, said Mr
Hutchinson’s spokesman, after the Su-
preme Court ruled and the clock ticked
down. No doubt. 7

Politics

Ossoﬀ’s face-oﬀ

S A N D Y S P R I N G S

Donald Trump emerges unscathed from a vote in Georgia—just
“NO RUN-OFF”, exhorted a sign at Jon
Ossoﬀ’s campaign oﬃce in Sandy
Springs. As it turned out, in the special elec-
tion for Georgia’s sixth congressional dis-
trict on April 18th—for a seat vacated by
Tom Price, now Donald Trump’s health
secretary—the Democrat fell just short of
the 50% needed to avoid a second round.
Mr Trump thus narrowly escaped an omi-
nous rebuke in the sort of place Democrats
hope to ﬂip in elections next year. 
Mr Ossoﬀ was a somewhat unlikely
face for the resistance. Just 30 years old, he
has managed a short stint as an investiga-
tive ﬁlm-maker and a longer one as a con-
gressional aide. Yet, with 48% of the vote,
he almost seized what has been safe Re-
publican territory since the 1970s. He was
propelled by three big factors, not all of
which will apply elsewhere.
First, Republican voters in the district—a
stretch of mostly well-heeled, white and
well-educated Atlanta suburbs—were nev-
er wild about Mr Trump. He only just pre-
vailed there in November, whereas Mr
Price, and Mitt Romney in 2012, won it
thumpingly. That left the Republicans in
the race ambivalent about how tightly to
embrace him; the most devoted of them
fared badly. And—second—there were lots
of Republicans in the race: 11 in what was
an open contest. They split their vote and
spent a lot of time attacking each other. 
Third, Mr Ossoﬀ was buoyed by an as-
tonishing surge of donations—he raised

more than $8m, mostly from elsewhere in
America—and by legions of volunteers. A
group of women waving “Vote your Os-
soﬀ!” signs in Dunwoody said that they
had been shaken out of political timidity
by Mr Trump’s antics and the women’s
march in Washington. Mr Ossoﬀ, one
claimed, is “wise beyond his years.”
The man himself tried both to channel
the anti-Trump indignation and to insist
that local issues mattered, too. For his part
the president criticised Mr Ossoﬀ on Twit-
ter and in a robocall to voters. “Glad to be
of help!”, he tweeted, as Mr Ossoﬀ fell
short. Possibly the millions of dollars’
worth of attack adverts funded by outside
Republican groups had more impact. Mr
Ossoﬀ was variously portrayed as a stooge
of Democratic bigwigs, an associate of ter-
rorists (his company has worked for Al Ja-
zeera) and wearing a Han Solo costume at
college. “I threaten the entrenched special
interests,” he explains. 
The question now is whether he can
prevail against a uniﬁed Republican front.
His opponent on June 20th will be Karen
Handel, a former Georgia secretary of state
and failed candidate for governor and the
Senate. Moreover, can Democrats who do
not beneﬁt from the zany dynamics of his
campaign hope for the same momentum,
especially when the ﬁrst shock of Mr
Trump’s rise wears oﬀ? “We are changing
the world,” Mr Ossoﬀ told supporters on
election night. We shall see. 7

Mere inches away

Maurizio Cattelan
in

shop at santonishoes.com

30 United States

The border barr ier

Backs to the wall

O T A Y M E S A

Those who will live and work near the
border wall are cool on it
WILLIAM, a tractor-trailer driver, leans
against his navy blue truck and stares
across the highway to the crowded hills of
Tijuana. He voted for Donald Trump, but
roundly opposes the president’s plans for a
new border wall. “People will ﬁnd a way
around any wall. And it’s going to be you
and me paying for it,” he warns, as NPR, a
public-radio station, streams from his ra-
dio. His attitude, which is surprisingly
widespread along the border, hints at trou-
ble for the president. 
On April 10th the customs and border
protection agency announced that it will
test prototypes of Donald Trump’s pro-
posed wall somewhere in the Otay Mesa
area after it chooses ﬁnalists this summer.
A barricade covered in solar panels, a wall
topped by a monorail and an obstacle
course in which one of the barriers is a 100-
foot ditch full of nuclear waste are just
some of the hundreds of proposals the de-
partment will choose from. 
Otay Mesa is a natural place to test a
wall (which is unlikely to be so whimsical),
suggests Eric Frost, who directs the home-
land-security graduate programme at San
Diego State University. The border crossing
is one of the county’s busiest but Otay
Mesa still has enough open land for new
construction. “The prototypes need to in-
teract with real people and real cars and
real trucks. It doesn’t make sense to build
them in the middle of the desert,” he says. 
The trouble is that Otay Mesa is Demo-
crat territory: the congressional district in
which it lies voted overwhelmingly for
Hillary Clinton. Nationally, only 8% of
Democrats support a new border wall,
compared with 74% of Republicans, ac-
cording to the Pew Research Centre, a
think-tank. Moreover, Republicans who
live close to Mexico seem less keen on a
wall than Republicans farther from the
border. Locals are used to the sight of im-
migrants working at undesirable jobs, ex-
plains Silvia Lopez, a registered Republican
who sells insurance in an Otay Mesa strip
mall. Like other border-dwellers, she
knows something that other Americans of-
ten forget: “We already have a wall.” 
California’s lieutenant-governor, Gavin
Newsom, has hinted that California’s pow-
erful environmental laws could stymie
building. Obstruction could spread. Of the
22 counties in California, Arizona, New
Mexico and Texas that share a border with
Mexico, 14 voted for Mrs Clinton last No-
vember (see map). 

The Economist Apr il 22nd 2017

N E V A D A

U N I

T

E D 

S

T A T

E

S

A R I Z O N A

N E W M E X I C O

T E X A S

C A L I F O R N I A

Tijuana

Otay Mesa

300 km

Tohono O’odham Reservation

M E X I C O

Presidential election 2016, win margin,%

Rep

Dem

20
10
5
0
5
10
20
Source: Atlas of US Presidential Elections

At least the federal government owns a
lot of land in southernmost California. In
Arizona, a large stretch of the border be-
longs to the Tohono O’odham, a Native
American tribe. In Texas, which has far less
fencing than America’s other border states,
most border land is in state or private

hands. The Trump administration would
have to use eminent domain to acquire
any private lands—a lengthy process that
involves negotiations, value appraisals
and, often, lawsuits. Time, perhaps, for Mr
Trump to demonstrate his vaunted deal-
making skills. 7

Immigrants and deﬁcits

Neither burdens nor saviours

W A S H I N G T O N , D C

Immigration cannot plug the hole in America’s budget
ON APRIL 12th almost 1,500 economists
of varied political hues wrote to Do-
nald Trump, urging him to consider the ad-
vantages of immigration. The beneﬁts to
America “far outweigh” the costs, they ex-
plained. Not only are immigrants often
skilled (especially in the sciences) and en-
trepreneurial, they also tend to be young.
As the baby-boom generation enters retire-
ment, a demographic counterweight will
come in handy. 
Mr Trump, who did not win the presi-
dency by listening to economists, proceed-
ed to order a review of high-skilled visas
on April 18th. The order is vague; his lan-
guage was not. “We’re going to defend our
workers, protect our jobs and ﬁnally put
America ﬁrst,” he said. On this issue the

New engines of the economy

United States, working-age population

Aged 25-64, m

US-born with
immigrant parents

F O R E C A S T
F O R E C A S T

Immigrants

US-born with
US-born parents

1965 75

85

95 2005 15

25

35

Source: Pew Research Centre

1

200

150

100

50

0

wonks can stand ﬁrm: highly educated im-
migrants are indisputably good for Ameri-
ca. Still, they should not claim too much.
As a treatment for America’s long-term
budgetary malaise, immigration is proba-
bly more of a painkiller than a cure. 
The eﬀects of immigration are hard to
calculate, for three reasons. The ﬁrst con-
cerns timing. Were it not for immigrants
and their children, the working-age popu-
lation would be shrinking (see chart 1).
More workers means the cost of support-
ing retirees is spread over more people. But
these new taxpayers will eventually retire
and claim beneﬁts themselves. By 2050
nearly a third of the foreign-born popula-
tion is expected to be over 65.
A second diﬃculty is that the costs and
beneﬁts of immigration fall on diﬀerent
levels of government. Workers pay federal
taxes, but get comparably little back from
the central government until they retire. In
the interim, state governments pay to edu-
cate their children, at an average cost of
$11,000 a year per child.
Consider a related issue—the eﬀect of
legalising illegal immigrants already in
America. The immigration reform that
passed the Senate in 2013, only to fail in the
House of Representatives, would have re-
duced deﬁcits by 0.1% of GDP in its ﬁrst de-
cade and 0.2% of GDP in its second, accord-
ing to oﬃcial estimates. That bill would
have provided a path to citizenship for ille-
gal immigrants, which would have made
them eligible for social security after ten 

1

The Economist Apr il 22nd 2017 

2 years of work. Yet the cost of these pension
promises was largely invisible, and even
the short-term estimates covered only the
federal budget. The Heritage Foundation, a
conservative think-tank, claims that the
full cost of a so-called “amnesty”—ignoring
other parts of the reform—is $5.3trn over 50
years, assuming no future changes to enti-
tlement spending.
The ﬁnal problem is the number of ﬁd-
dly assumptions needed to work out the
ﬁscal contribution of anyone, let alone im-
migrants. How, for instance, should an-
alysts treat spending on public goods, such
as defence? This need not rise with popula-
tion, but in practice it tends to. At what rate
should they discount the tax payments of
immigrants’ descendants? How might tax-
ation and spending change in future? 
A large panel of economists, convened
by the National Academies, has tried to un-
tangle this mess. Last September they esti-
mated the ﬁscal impact of immigrants over
75 years, under diﬀerent sets of assump-
tions. One scenario is shown in chart 2. It
ignores public goods and assumes that tax-
es and spending grow at the same rate as
productivity. It shows that, like natives, im-
migrants tend to beneﬁt the treasury only
if they are well-educated. The net contribu-
tion of an immigrant with a bachelor’s de-
gree is worth over $200,000 now. A thinly
educated immigrant costs $115,000.
Broadly, immigrants to America are less
educated than natives. In recent years, 21%
had less than a high-school education,
compared with 7% of American-born folk.
This brings down their estimated ﬁscal
contribution over 75 years to $92,000 each
(under the given assumptions). If all immi-
grants, rather than only recent ones, are
counted, the number turns negative.
Might low-skilled immigrants instead
contribute to the coﬀers by having plenty
of children? Immigrants have a fertility rate
(the number of children per women) of 2.3,
compared with 1.9 among natives. Their
children are more socially mobile, which
also helps. Partly as a result, a 25-year-old
immigrant is almost always a better bet for

Give me your poor… oh, maybe not

United States, estimated 75-year f iscal impact* 

By education level of f irst-generation immigrants
2012 $, ’000

2

First-generation immigrants
Descendants

Less than
high 
school

High
school

Some
college

BA

More
than BA

600

400

200

+

0

–

200

Source: National 
Academies of Sciences, 
Engineer ing and Medicine

*Net present value at all levels
of government combined.
Excludes public goods

United States 31

the public purse than a 25-year-old native
with a comparable education. 
Yet immigrants’ social mobility is still
low in absolute terms. Children of foreign-
born parents who did not ﬁnish high
school are thought to have less than a one-
in-ﬁfteen chance of graduating from col-
lege. The descendants of low-skilled immi-
grants are likely to remain a ﬁscal drag.
Even on the rosiest assumptions, much
more immigration than is feasible would
be needed to support the greying native
population. The most generous model val-
ues the likely net ﬁscal contributions of a
graduate immigrant of working age, and of
his or her descendants, at a little over
$500,000 over 75 years. A rough calcula-
tion suggests that almost 40m such immi-

grants would need to arrive immediately
in order to ﬁll the hole caused by social-se-
curity payments and hospital visits for the
over-65s. They would have to be followed
by 36m more by 2047—arrivals that are al-
ready baked into budgetary forecasts. Mi-
gration on such a scale seemed unlikely
even before the immigrant-bashing Mr
Trump came along.
Whether they come as immigrants or as
babies, new arrivals cannot change the fact
that America promises more in beneﬁts to
its residents than it takes from them in tax-
es. Highly skilled migrants help the public
ﬁnances—more so, probably, than compa-
rably educated natives. But they cannot
provide much of an escape from the com-
ing ﬁscal squeeze. 7

Post oﬃce v pooches

Leash the hounds

N EW Y O R K

Online shopping helps the post oﬃce’s bottom line—and delights mutts
CHISELLED in granite on a post oﬃce
in Manhattan is the United States
Postal Service’s unoﬃcial motto: “Nei-
ther snow nor rain nor heat nor gloom of
night stays these couriers from the swift
completion of their appointed rounds.”
Dogs sometimes do, though. The number
of canine attacks on postal workers has
climbed from 5,581 in 2013 to 6,755 in 2016.
Most attacks occur in cities, where postal
workers often walk to make deliveries.
Los Angeles has the worst record, with 80
dog attacks last year, followed by Hous-
ton with 62. 
Thanks to e-mail, online banking and
the like, the postal service delivers many
fewer letters than it used to. The volume
of ﬁrst-class mail it handles has dropped
from 91bn items in 2008 to 61bn in 2016.
But internet shopping has led to a jump
in parcel deliveries—up from 3.3bn to
5.2bn in the same period. Posties with
parcels often knock on doors, which
gives the dogs an opportunity. 

Following a rise in canine attacks in
2015, the post oﬃce launched an app on
postal workers’ hand-held scanners that
warns of dogs at certain houses. Owners
of repeat oﬀenders are told to pick up
post at a nearby post oﬃce. If a loose dog
plagues a postman, delivery to an entire
neighbourhood can be suspended. Carri-
ers are also trained to use their satchels as
barriers and carry pepper spray. Some
carry dog biscuits to distract aggressive
and hungry mutts.
Dog attacks cost the postal service
$2.8m in medical compensation and
other expenses last year, up from $1.2m in
2011. Half of the attacks in 2016 required
medical treatment or time oﬀ from the
mail route. The postal service has asked
customers to put dogs in a diﬀerent room
before opening the door. But the danger
is unlikely to disappear. Another reason
to hope that Amazon can make drone
deliveries work—though those drones
could be worth a nibble, too. 

32 United States

Health-care costs

An arm and a leg

Even people with insurance struggle to
pay for medical care
ALTHOUGH Donald Trump occasional-
ly pokes it in the ribs, the ﬁght seems to
have gone out of the Republican eﬀort to
reform America’s health-care system. That
is a shame, not because the ﬁrst attempt at
reform was well-judged, but because the
system badly needs attention. Seven years
after Obamacare became law, health care
remains ruinously expensive. 
Even as the number of people without
insurance has fallen, the proportion of
Americans who struggle to pay for treat-
ment has hardly budged. In February of
this year, 29% of people said they or a fam-
ily member had struggled to pay a medical
bill, according to a poll by the Kaiser Family
Foundation; in March 2010, 30% said the
same thing. About 60% of the strugglers in
the latest poll had used up most or all of
their savings; nearly three-quarters had cut
back spending on food, clothes and basic
household items. 
Strikingly, 30% of people with health in-
surance reported struggling—not much
lower than the 41% without insurance who
did so (retired people, who are covered by
a government scheme, fared better: only
20% said they struggled). One reason is
that insurers have been passing on more
medical charges to patients. A typical in-
surance plan has a long list of things for
which patients must pay a share. In high-
deductible plans, which are increasingly
popular, families must pay at least $2,600
before any insurance kicks in. Last year a
quarter of employers, through whom most
Americans get health insurance, oﬀered
only high-deductible plans. Some two-
ﬁfths plan to do so in the next three years.
Insurance can be alarmingly patchy. A
surgeon who stitches up a patient rushed
to the emergency room may not be cov-
ered by the patient’s health insurance,
even when the procedure takes place at a
hospital where a stay would be covered. A
survey in 2015 found that a third of Ameri-
cans with private insurance had received
such surprise bills, often from an anaesthe-
tist or another doctor.
Patients often do not help themselves
even when they can. Only half of Ameri-
cans have tried to ﬁnd out what they
would be charged before seeking care, ac-
cording to a recent survey by Public Agen-
da, a think-tank. Most people think, wrong-
ly, that all doctors and hospitals charge
about the same. 
In the public’s defence, health plans are
opaque and complicated. Many people do

not know what type of plan they have be-
cause so many have cryptic names, says
Larry Levitt at the Kaiser Family Founda-
tion. Working out costs in advance is so
tricky that the University of New Hamp-
shire has started oﬀering education on
health-care literacy. David Schleifer, who
led the Public Agenda survey, says the task
can be mind-boggling. To ﬁnd out the cost
of a hernia operation, he had to peruse the
list on the insurer’s website, call the hospi-
tal to ask about the speciﬁc billing codes for
the procedure and then call the insurer to
check the patient’s payment for those
codes. Those who lack his nous must hope
that their health holds. 7

Population change

Out of the frozen
north

C H I C A G O

Migration southward and westward is
picking up again
LIKE birds, people tend to move from
place to place along established routes.
Since the second world war, among the
most travelled of these routes in America
has been from the “snow belt” in the Mid-
west and north-east to the “sun belt” in the
south and west. The recession that began
in 2007 knocked Americans oﬀ course for
a while, and led to conﬁdent predictions
that old cities would recover some of their
population losses. But people have begun
to head southward and westward again. 
According to recently released esti-
mates by the census bureau, Maricopa
county in Arizona, which includes Phoe-
nix and its suburbs, grew by 222 people a
day on average in the year to July 2016. It
overtook Harris county in Texas, home to
Houston, as the county with the highest
annual population growth. Cook county,
which includes Chicago, saw the largest
population fall in the same period, with a
net loss of more than 21,000 people. Seven
of America’s eight fastest-growing states

The Economist Apr il 22nd 2017

are in the west. (In addition to Arizona,
they are Colorado, Idaho, Nevada, Oregon,
Utah and Washington; the eighth state is
Florida.) Illinois, which contains Chicago,
has lost more people than any other state
for three years in a row.
People tend to move for work, says Wil-
liam Frey, a demographer at the Brookings
Institution, a think-tank. In that respect the
west scores highly: Arizona and Nevada
are expected to have exceptionally high
job growth this year. Mortgages have be-
come easier to obtain in general, and the re-
covering housing market has enabled retir-
ees to sell up and move to warmer places.
Simple fashion plays a part, too: trendy cit-
ies like Austin, Denver and San Francisco
are drawing many people between the
ages of 25 and 35. 
Another context is race. Blacks seem es-
pecially keen to leave Chicago, and the
Midwest in general, for the southern states
that many of their ancestors ﬂed about a
century ago. Mr Frey calls this “the great
migration of blacks in reverse”. In 1970 the
Chicago area had the second-largest black
population in the country, with some 1.3m
residents, more than double the black pop-
ulation of metropolitan Atlanta. Today
more blacks live in and around Atlanta
than Chicago. And the southern metropo-
lis is much more racially mixed. According
to the Urban Institute, a think-tank, Atlanta
was the 41st most segregated of 100 large
American metropolises in 2010 (down
from 21st most segregated in 1990). Chicago
ranked tenth. 
“Blacks who live in only black areas do
much worse in life,” says Edward Glaeser,
an economist at Harvard University who
specialises in cities. Schools in such areas
tend to be poor—the quality of public
schools in Chicago’s South Side, where
many blacks live, ranges from poor to exe-
crable. The Metropolitan Planning Coun-
cil, a Chicago think-tank, estimates that re-
gional GDP would be $8bn a year higher if
Chicago were only as segregated as the av-
erage American metropolis. It is only an
educated guess. That segregation is costly
is, however, almost certain. 7

The great reversion

Chicago metropolitan area, ’000*

Population change†

Net international migration
Net domestic migration

120

90

60

30

+

0

–

1991

95

2000

05

10

16

30

60

90

Sources: Brookings 
Institution;
Census Bureau

*Based on mid-year
population estimates
†Includes bir ths and deaths

The Economist Apr il 22nd 2017 

United States 33

Lexington

Divided by a common border

Canadian and American neighbours see the Syrian refugee crisis from opposite sides

hind that discussion, Teresa Macaluso, has been accused in local
blogs of wanting to import terrorists. Constituents telephoned to
thunder: “We look after our own.” At the next meeting, a local
shouted about Muslims raping women and beheading people. 
The counties around Morristown and Watertown voted deci-
sively for Mr Trump. “People believe in Trump’s rhetoric that refu-
gees are bad,” Ms Macaluso sighs—even though, she says, nearby
cities such as Utica have beneﬁted from refugees buying aban-
doned houses and starting businesses. Ms Macaluso, a retired
nurse, is braced for a backlash at her next election in November. If
she loses, “So be it.” 
Ms Macaluso has allies. The Roman Catholic diocese that cov-
ers Morristown and Watertown has called for compassionate im-
migration laws and is about to twin with a Maronite diocese in
Latakia, Syria, oﬀering support to Christians trying to survive
there. Father Steven Murray, pastor of Holy Family Church, be-
lieves that Watertown will receive refugees one day. “In the pre-
sent climate,” though, he believes the State Department would
not grant the required certiﬁcation to a refugee committee.
Father Murray, who grew up in the American border town of
Ogdensburg, near Morristown, argues that Canada has always
been more open. Go back to the 19th and early 20th centuries,
when upstate New York boomed and, he says: “We didn’t want
the Irish here, then they didn’t want the Italians here.” 
In Canada Brockville’s mayor, David Henderson, agrees that
security has changed the river: he remembers windsurﬁng to
America as a teenager to buy illicit beers. He also suspects that a
big terror attack could shake the broad consensus that has seen
over 40,000 Syrians welcomed to Canada since November 2015,
about a third of them privately sponsored. Even now, perhaps a
ﬁfth of his residents are “uncomfortable” with refugees: he works
hard to deal with concerns and rumours. But, crucially, his city of
22,000 people, 95% of them whites of European descent, knows
that without new families it will shrink.

The North America that never staged a revolution
Canadians are relatively trusting of the state, adds Jacqueline
Schoemaker Holmes, head of “Refugees for Brockville”, an um-
brella group for private sponsors. A poll in March found that 41%
of Canadians think that recent ﬂows of asylum-seekers across the
snowy border from America will make their country less safe—a
trend that may yet threaten the vocally pro-refugee stance taken
by the prime minister, Justin Trudeau. But to a striking degree, Ms
Schoemaker Holmes suggests, Canadians have “faith in their gov-
ernment” to ensure that refugees are given a haven and are prop-
erly vetted. Americans seem more “individualistic”.
Brockville’s newest refugee, an engineer from Damascus, ar-
rived in February with his wife and three children. He asks not to
be named to protect family still in Syria. The “majority” of Brock-
villians have been friendly, he says. He hopes to start a business
with Ahmad Khadra, an old friend from Syria who emigrated to
Canada in 1995. Though Canada will oﬀer welfare payments to
refugees who do not ﬁnd work, Brockville’s Muslims are anxious
that newcomers ﬁnd jobs. Some refugees have “less than zero
education”, concedes Mr Khadra, so parents struggle. But their
children are thriving at school; he is sure they will go on to be pro-
ductive citizens. Mr Khadra thinks Canadian-American diﬀer-
ences go back to the War of Independence: only one country
chose a revolution. His adopted country is “more civilised, I’m
sorry,” he apologises. Spoken like a Canadian. 7

AMILE of water divides the American village of Morristown
from its Canadian neighbour, Brockville. Their economies
were once closely linked, with small factories on each bank of the
St Lawrence river producing patent medicines such as Dr Morse’s
Indian Root Pills and Dr Williams’ Pink Pills for Pale People. Old
folk remember winters when the river froze, and trees jammed
into the ice marked a path to Canada. Both towns are conserva-
tive. The elected town supervisor of Morristown, Frank Putnam,
a Republican, is especially exercised by welfare spending in his
county, a struggling tract of upstate New York sustained by dairy
farms, summer tourism and two state prisons.
Now a debate with worldwide resonance has revealed diﬀer-
ences between the two settlements. In common with cities
across Canada, Brockville has volunteered to host Syrian refu-
gees. Residents, church groups and civic leaders are raising about
$25,000 in private funds to sponsor each family for a year. Across
the St Lawrence, by contrast, Mr Putnam is sure that the cost of re-
ceiving refugees would cause “alarm” in Morristown. He sup-
ports President Donald Trump’s attempts to halt refugee arrivals
from Syria and impose “extreme vetting” on other travellers. Mr
Trump wants a “time-out” to ﬁne-tune security, says Mr Putnam,
in private life a salesman for Cowsmopolitan, a magazine for
dairy farmers: “Where’s the dirtiness in doing that?”
Brockville is in southernmost Canada, a busily aﬄuent re-
gion, Morristown in northernmost New York, an area in long-
term decline. These diverging economic fortunes give people “a
diﬀerent outlook”, suggests Mr Putnam. Morristown is not invari-
ably hostile to outsiders, he insists: nearby farms employ Central
Americans in jobs that “entitled” locals shun. But many resent be-
ing taxed to pay for welfare for less assiduous folk. The terror at-
tacks of September 2001 also left a mark. The border patrol often
erects road blocks on the highway; river security can be “ex-
treme”. Canada has been “pretty unscathed” by terrorism, he
says, whereas America is “a little gun-shy.”
Yet attitudes to refugees seem too visceral to be explained by
economics or recent history alone. An hour down the road from
Morristown, in Watertown, reverberations continue from a coun-
cil meeting last October at which speakers outlined an economic
and moral case for welcoming refugees. The council member be-

34

The Amer icas

Corruption in Latin Amer ica (1)

Fachin victims

S Ã O P A U L O

Despite a mounting scandal, Brazil’s government soldiers on
THE latest revelations of wrongdoing in
One reason for that is that Mr Fachin’s
high places struck Brazil with the force
targets are only being investigated, not in-
of a Netﬂix release: they are riveting, but so
dicted. He based his decision on state-
far have left the real world undisturbed.
ments by 78 former executives of Ode-
On April 12th Edson Fachin, the supreme-
brecht, a big construction ﬁrm, who
court justice who is overseeing a vast
testiﬁed as part of plea bargains with pros-
probe into corruption centred on Petro-
ecutors. One testiﬁed that Odebrecht fun-
bras, the state-controlled oil company, au-
nelled $3.3bn to politicians between 2006
thorised prosecutors to investigate eight
and 2014, the equivalent of 80% of its net
government ministers, 24 senators, 39 dep-
proﬁts over the period. Most of this money
uties in the lower house of congress and
came from padded contracts awarded to
three state governors. He sent dozens of
the company by state-controlled entities,
cases to lower courts; they will now con-
including Petrobras. (Odebrecht has admit-
sider whether to launch new criminal in-
ted to bribing oﬃcials in 11 other Latin
quiries into nine more state governors and
American and African countries.)
three former presidents. All the big politi-
The testimony disclosed by Mr Fachin,
cal parties and most front-runners in next
year’s presidential election have been tar-
nished (see chart).
This fresh scourging of the political
class comes at an awkward time. Brazil’s
worst recession on record has not ended.
Michel Temer, who became president last
year after the impeachment of his prede-
cessor, Dilma Rousseﬀ, hopes to stabilise
the economy by enacting reforms. His ap-
proval rating is a dismal 20%; that of his
government is ten points lower. Yet the
storm of scandal has yet to capsize reforms
or sink hopes of an economic recovery. The
value of Brazil’s currency, bonds and the
index of the main stock exchange wea-
kened after Mr Fachin’s revelations, but
only brieﬂy. The extensive new inquiries
“had largely been priced in”, says Cláudio
Couto, a political scientist at Fundação Ge-
tulio Vargas, a university in São Paulo.

Ministers
Federal deputies
Others

PMDB
PSDB
Progressive 
Par ty

Brazil, politicians under investigation

Senators
State governors

Sources: Globo; Estado de São Paulo

No current 
par ty af f iliation

Political perks

0

5

10

15

20

Alleged br ibes per party, reais m

Opposition*

Workers’ Par ty

Apr il 2017

Coalition*

287

152

93

409

*Selected par ties

The Economist Apr il 22nd 2017

Also in this section
35 The long arm of Mexico’s policía
35 A row over Argentina’s ﬂag
36 Bello: Chile in a Spanish mirror

and analysed by Brazilian journalists, re-
veals how much money the politicians al-
legedly received, to enrich themselves,
their parties or both. Guido Mantega, a for-
mer ﬁnance minister from Ms Rousseﬀ’s
Workers’ Party (PT), reportedly got 93m
reais ($30m). Aécio Neves, a senator (and
potential presidential candidate) from the
Party of Brazilian Social Democracy
(PSDB), part of Mr Temer’s coalition, alleg-
edly received 65.5m reais. Everyone on Mr
Fachin’s list denies wrongdoing. Ode-
brecht witnesses claim that Mr Temer him-
self was present at meetings where illegal
campaign donations were discussed,
which he denies. He is immune from pros-
ecution for any crime he might have com-
mitted before he became president.
Mr Temer is striving to project an air of
normality. The disclosures, he says, are
“staggering”, but “we have to move
ahead”. He has said he will only dismiss
cabinet ministers who are formally
charged. Although the supreme court has
given Mr Fachin extra manpower to deal
with the massive caseload, that may take
months. The compromised cabinet has
some breathing room.
Congress, too, is trying to conduct poli-
tics as usual. Most members of Mr Temer’s
centrist coalition, including his Party of the
Brazilian Democratic Movement (PMDB),
see economy-strengthening reforms as the
only way to regain credibility with voters.
The reforms themselves are not popular.
Plans to liberalise labour laws, for example
by deregulating working hours, are not a
vote-winner. Still less is a proposal to ﬁx
the ruinously expensive pension system,
Mr Temer’s most important policy. Trade
unions linked to the PT, which is as mired
in scandal as government parties, have
called a general strike against pension re-
form on April 28th.
Nervous congressmen have forced Mr
Temer to compromise. He has agreed to set
a lower minimum pension age for women 

1

The Economist Apr il 22nd 2017 

2 than he had planned (62, rather than 65)
and to ease transition rules for men and
women. This reduces the prospective sav-
ings from pension reform by 170bn reais
over ten years. Even so, it should still save
the government a substantial 630bn reais
over that period. If it goes through, women
will retire ten years later than they do now
on average. That is probably enough to re-
assure the central bank, which has been
cutting interest rates, mainly in response to
lower inﬂation. Without the prospect of
savings on pensions, the central bank
might reduce rates more slowly, which
would hurt the economy.
Mr Temer is fortunate that voters are
feeling cynical rather than ﬁred up. There
are no plans to repeat the big anti-corrup-
tion protests that helped topple Ms Rous-
seﬀ last year. Disclosure of Mr Fachin’s list
has reassured Brazilians that the dragnet is
going ahead without interference.
Any attempt by congress to change that
would revive the outrage, warns João Cas-
tro Neves of Eurasia Group, a political con-
sultancy. Earlier this year the legislature
tried to give its members amnesty for tak-
ing undeclared campaign donations, but
backed down in the face of popular oppo-
sition. The uneasy political calm could also
end if congressmen start testifying against
one another, or if investigations turn into
indictments. Mr Temer has so far kept re-
forms moving forward and the scandal-
plagued government aﬂoat. His job is get-
ting harder all the time. 7

Corruption in Latin Amer ica (2)

The long arm of
the policía

M E X I C O C I T Y

Two fugitive governors were a cause of
embarrassment. Their arrest stirs hope
ONE of the odder pieces of evidence
turned up by investigations of Javier
Duarte, a former governor of the state of
Veracruz, was an exercise book with his
wife’s scrawl. “Sí merezco abundancia”
(“Yes I deserve wealth”), she had written,
over and over. During six years in charge of
the state on the Gulf of Mexico, Mr Duarte
allegedly did his best to acquire it. He was
arrested at a resort in Guatemala on April
15th, after six months on the run. Five days
earlier Tomás Yarrington, an ex-governor
of the northern state of Tamaulipas, was
nabbed in Florence, Italy. He had been
eluding justice for ﬁve years. 
The two fugitive governors are both for-
mer members of the Institutional Revolu-
tionary Party (PRI), to which Mexico’s pres-
ident, Enrique Peña Nieto, belongs. The
attorney-general has investigated at least 11
state governors since 2010, nine of them

from the PRI. Mr Peña once praised Mr
Duarte and two other tainted governors as
exemplars of the PRI’s “new generation”.
This does its image no good ahead of an
election in June in the State of Mexico, Mr
Peña’s political home. The outcome will be
a harbinger of next year’s presidential elec-
tion (in which Mr Peña cannot run again).
The governors’ arrest is a sign that the
country is cracking down on corruption,
though not yet hard enough.
Veracruz under Mr Duarte became “a
state of terror”, according to the Interna-
tional Crisis Group, an NGO. At least 17
journalists were killed during his adminis-
tration, from 2010 to 2016. He is being inves-
tigated on suspicion of having moved
233m pesos ($12m) of public money into
ghost companies. Mr Duarte’s successor al-
leges that state hospitals administered fake
cancer drugs to children during his rule. In
2016 the PRI lost control of the state for the
ﬁrst time in more than 80 years. Mr Duarte
resigned in October, two months before
the end of his term, and disappeared by the
time an arrest warrant was issued a few
days later.
Mr Yarrington, who governed Tamauli-
pas from 1999 to 2005, has been charged
with collaborating with the Gulf Cartel, a
drug gang. According to the Wall Street Jour-
nal, the state’s government provided body-
guards for him even as he was on the run
from federal charges.
Such crookedness is an old problem.
“Corruption is not a disagreeable charac-
teristic of the Mexican political system: it is
the system,” wrote Gabriel Zaid, an essay-
ist, 30 years ago. At state level it may have
got worse. When Mr Zaid was writing Mex-
ican presidents (all of them priistas) re-
moved governors almost at will. With the
arrival of democracy in the 1990s power
was dispersed and the president’s inﬂu-
ence waned. In 2000 Vicente Fox of the Na-
tional Action Party became the ﬁrst non-
PRI president in seven decades, but faced
governors who were mostly from the for-
mer ruling party. To win their co-operation
he sent more money and gave them licence
to behave more or less as they wished. His
successors have continued that practice.
The arrests of Messrs Duarte and Yar-
rington suggest that tolerance is waning. A
freedom-of-information law (in force since
2003), social media and more assertive-
ness by the press and civil society have
made it harder for politicians to get away
with wrongdoing. The federal government
faces the most scrutiny, but the demand for
accountability is spreading to the states. A
new “anti-corruption system” is supposed
to police all levels of government, by co-or-
dinating corruption-ﬁghting agencies and
strengthening the federal auditor, among
other things. It has yet to make a diﬀerence.
Mr Peña no doubt hopes that voters will re-
member his party for chasing wrongdoers
rather than advancing their careers. 7

The Amer icas 35

Argentine histor y

Two shades of
blue

B U E N O S A I R E S

Putting the vex in vexillology
ARGENTINA’S national colours are in-
stantly recognisable. The ﬂag’s sky-
blue stripes and golden sun adorn every-
thing from football shirts to fridge mag-
nets. A huge monument in Rosario, a port
city, marks the site where Manuel Bel-
grano, a founding father, raised the ﬁrst ﬂag
in 1812. On the anniversary of his death,
June 20th, schoolchildren pledge to hon-
our the “white and sky-blue” colours.
But are they saluting the right shade of
blue? A study published in a recent edition
of Chemistry Select, a peer-reviewed jour-
nal, suggests not. Researchers at Argenti-
na’s scientiﬁc research council (CONICET)
and Brazil’s Federal University of Juiz de
Fora examined silk threads from what is
thought to be the oldest surviving ﬂag, the
enormous but faded San Francisco ﬂag.
The shocking discovery: its blue was ultra-
marine, a much darker pigment.
This is about more than just getting the
tint right. Years of civil war followed Ar-
gentina’s independence from Spain in 1816.
The Federalists, led by Juan Manuel de Ro-
sas, a bloodstained autocrat, fought for de-
centralised government with strong prov-
inces under dark-blue colours. The
Unitarians, who wanted a strong central
government in Buenos Aires, rallied to the
lighter shade. The dark-hued Federalists
ruled from 1831 to 1852 but were eventually
defeated by the sky-blue Unitarians. The
colour war has never really ended. “These
two visions of the country still persist,”
says Francisco Gregoric, a vexillologist.
After the Unitarians’ triumph, most Ar-
gentines assumed that Belgrano’s ﬂag must
have been light blue, despite his reluctance
to back the faction. That belief was shaken
when researchers took a close look at the
San Francisco ﬂag, which they say was
made in Europe in 1814. Though it has been 

1

Standard deviation

Argentina’s disputed f lag colours
Sky blue

Ultramar ine

Sources: IRAM; CONICET/Federal University
of Juiz de Fora

36 The Amer icas

The Economist Apr il 22nd 2017

2

bleached by age and by dust stirred up by
decades of sugar-cane harvests, scientists
used chemical analysis, X-rays and spec-
troscopy to determine that the pigment in
its blue stripes was made from lapis lazuli,
which produces the darker shade.
Carlos Della Védova, a researcher at
CONICET, says the ﬁndings apply only to
the San Francisco ﬂag (which, unlike mod-
ern ones, does not bear the 32-pointed
“sun of May”). Still, he thinks, Belgrano’s
original was probably the same colour as
that of the San Francisco ﬂag. The newer
ﬂag was a gift to the Temple of San Francis-
co, a school in the northern province of Tu-

cumán, from Bernabé Aráoz, a comrade-
in-arms of Belgrano. Mr Della Védova
doubts the two soldiers took diﬀerent
views of hue. “Aráoz was aware of Bel-
grano’s ideas about the ﬂag,” he says.
Some historians detect in the colour
shift a sneaky attempt to rehabilitate De
Rosas’s reputation. Juan Pablo Bustos
Thames, author of a book about the San
Francisco ﬂag and owner of a full-scale
(sky-blue) replica, says the scientists ig-
nored contemporary documents that at-
test to a lighter colour. Manuel Belgrano, a
descendant of the independence hero,
says it is unthinkable that his ancestor

would have 
favoured ultramarine.
“There’s no doubt about the colour”, he
told Clarín, a newspaper.
Whatever the truth, Argentines will not
soon wave ultramarine ﬂags. In 2002
IRAM, the national standard-setting agen-
cy, conﬁrmed the lighter colour by specify-
ing its co-ordinates in the Lab colour sys-
tem. It also set out how thick the stripes
should be and how the sun should look. A
decree in 2010 by the then-president, Cris-
tina Fernández de Kirchner, enshrined
those standards in law. Argentines are not
about to change their stripes, whatever the
chemists say. 7

Bello

Chile in a Spanish mirror

Transatlantic lessons for Michelle Bachelet’s heirs
ALONG dictatorship ended in a negoti-
ated transition to democracy. The
centre-left took oﬃce with a moderate
programme, reassured the right by pursu-
ing pro-market economic policies, added
better social provision and reconnected
the country to the world. Power later
switched to the right, which persuaded
the country that it had become democrat-
ic. Then the centre-left returned, this time
as a new generation critical of the com-
promises of the transition. It veered fur-
ther left but faced economic diﬃculties.
Spain? Yes. But Chile, too. Since the dic-
tatorships of Generals Franco and Pino-
chet, politics in the two countries has run
along uncannily parallel tracks, with
Chile lagging Spain by ten to 15 years. In
Spain, Felipe González, the Socialist
prime minister in 1982-96, laid the founda-
tions of democracy, combining liberal
economic reforms with a new welfare
state and leading the country into Europe.
When José María Aznar of the conserva-
tive People’s Party (PP) took over, he con-
tinued many of Mr González’s policies.
Then the Socialists returned under José
Luis Rodríguez Zapatero, who confronted
the right through progressive social re-
forms (such as abortion and gay mar-
riage) and by approving a Law of Histori-
cal Memory, an implicit criticism of the
amnesty agreed during the transition. 
Spain’s transition served as an exam-
ple for democrats in Chile, where the cen-
tre-left Concertación coalition governed
in the mould of Mr González from 1990
onwards (though with a more timid in-
crease in public spending and welfare
provision). In 2010, with Pinochet dead
and discredited by his indictment for hu-
man-rights abuses by a Spanish judge, Se-
bastián Piñera, a billionaire businessman,
won power for the centre-right. Like Mr
Aznar, he followed policies similar to his

predecessor’s. Then in 2014 Michelle Ba-
chelet, who in her ﬁrst term governed for
the Concertación as a moderate, came
back determined, like Mr Zapatero, to
shake up the transition settlement, though
in a diﬀerent way. She has tried to push
through reforms of tax, education, labour,
pensions and the electoral system, as well
as a new constitution, with the aim of re-
placing “the model” bequeathed by the
dictatorship. One of her allies called this
deploying a “retroexcavadora” (backhoe
loader) against this legacy.
In Spain, Mr Zapatero’s government
was overwhelmed by the euro crisis,
which spawned Podemos, a new far-left
party. The crisis, and then the left’s divi-
sions, have delivered successive election
victories for Mariano Rajoy and the PP.
Chile has not suﬀered anything as dramat-
ic. But the economy has grown sluggishly
since 2014, partly because of the uncertain-
ty caused by Ms Bachelet’s reforms, many
of which have been clumsily handled. 
Does the Chilean centre-left, now
called the New Majority, face a Spanish fu-
ture of division and defeat? The main cre-
dential of its likely candidate in a presiden-

tial election in November, Alejandro
Guillier, is his past as a television anchor-
man. Although a senator since 2014, he
comes over as a new face who is not part
of a political class that, as in Spain, has
been discredited by scandals. His ideas
seem vague: he has both presented him-
self as a moderate and called for “rup-
ture” with the present. Some on the cen-
tre-left call him a populist. Above all, he
seems to stand for a continuation of Ms
Bachelet’s model-breaking approach.
That may not help him. She is unpop-
ular. Mr Guillier may also face rivals with-
in the New Majority: the Christian Demo-
crats may run their own candidate. A
stronger far-left, akin to Podemos, has
emerged from student protests in 2011. 
With seven months to go, the election
is still open, but it looks like Mr Piñera’s to
lose. That seems to be the view of Ricardo
Lagos, the most successful of the Concer-
tación presidents. At the age of 79, he
sought the support of the Socialist Party
only to be snubbed in favour of Mr Guil-
lier. In announcing his withdrawal this
month he warned of the “strategic disper-
sion” of progressive forces” and a “conser-
vative…restoration that could last many
years”.
In Chile, as in Spain, the transition ush-
ered in the most successful period in the
country’s history, with greater prosperity
and social progress. In both cases the cen-
tre-left began to go astray when it ceased
to believe in its own success. That is not to
deny that both countries have now
moved on, and that both have new pro-
blems that need solving. Chile needs bet-
ter public services and environmental
regulation, less abuse by monopolies and
a less unequal society. That amounts to
improving “the model” rather than re-
placing it on ideological grounds. The job
may well fall to Mr Piñera.

Middle East and Afr ica

The Economist Apr il 22nd 2017 37

Also in this section
38 Racial quotas in Namibia?
39 Alger ia’s general election
40 Internal divisions in Gaza
40 Islam’s changing fashions

For daily analysis and debate on the Middle East
and Afr ica, visit
Economist.com/world/middle-east-afr ica 

dependent. From Lusaka to Lagos, subur-
ban housing estates and shopping malls,
seemingly transplanted from Houston or
Atlanta, are springing up at the edge of cit-
ies. But the vast majority of Africans can-
not aﬀord cars. In Nairobi slums are among
the very few places close to jobs where it is
possible to go shopping, watch a ﬁlm and
get a street-side meal, all without having to
get into a vehicle.
The need to be near jobs helps explain
why slums often sit next to staggering
wealth. In Nairobi Mathare is wedged be-
tween Eastleigh, a bustling Somali com-
mercial hub, and Muthaiga, a luxurious
country club popular with white Kenyans.
Alexandra in Johannesburg, a township of
tin shacks, is at the edge of Sandton, the
city’s poshest oﬃce district. In Lagos, a me-
gacity where two-thirds of people live in
slums, Makoko, a collection of shacks built
on stilts in the lagoon, sits under the city’s
Third Mainland Bridge, across from which
new oﬃce buildings rent for vast sums.
Africa’s slums are full of enterprising
people. But they are also deeply dysfunc-
tional places, where much of the popula-
tion lives in a Hobbesian world of exploita-
tion. It is not just electricity that is provided
by violent cartels; so is water, rubbish col-
lection and security. The state scarcely en-
ters: in most slums, health care and educa-
tion are provided privately or by charities,
if at all. Diseases such as cholera and HIV
are rife. There is often little in the way of a
legal system to protect property rights. In-
stead, well-connected landlords make for-
tunes renting tiny patches of land to people
who have nowhere else to go.
And slums are violent. In Nairobi the
cartels ﬁght vicious turf wars with each
other. Some, like the Mungiki, a Kikuyu
maﬁa, are organised on ethnic lines. In La-
gos slums like Makoko are run by local
chiefs called “baales”, who dress like mob
bosses and expect tributes from residents. 

1

Afr ica’s slums

The great urban racket

N A I R O B I

There for a reason
Slums grow because they provide some-
thing poor people need: aﬀordable hous-
ing near to work, schools and public tran-
sport. Perversely, for such a poor continent,
African cities tend to be sprawling and car-

Making slums less exploitative may be Africa’s biggest challenge
STANDING on a muddy patch of grass in
nent’s slum population more than dou-
Mathare, a district in the eastern part of
bled, to some 200m people. Finding ways
Nairobi, Kevin surveys his handiwork.
to improve slums will be one of the most
From an electricity pylon, a thick bundle of
pressing problems of the 21st century for
crudely twisted wire hangs down into a
African governments.
tin-roofed shack. From there it spreads to a
dozen more. Single wires run perilously at
eye level over open sewers, powering bare
light-bulbs, kettles and blaring speakers. In
exchange for a connection, Kevin and six
of his friends collect 200 shillings per
month each (about $2) from about a hun-
dred shacks in his corner of the slum. To
protect the business, the gang pays oﬀ po-
lice oﬃcers and intimidates the competi-
tion. The connections, Kevin insists, are
cheaper than oﬃcial ones, and safer too.
The rotting body of a fried rat near one of
the lines suggests otherwise.
So goes the provision of public services
in Nairobi’s poorest districts. These war-
rens of shacks and crudely built apartment
blocks are home to 40% of the city’s popu-
lation, according to one recent World Bank
survey (others put the ﬁgure even higher).
As the city’s population has exploded—
from a third of a million at independence
in 1963 to over 4m now—so too have the
slums. Across Africa, they are the primary
way by which hundreds of thousands of
people have escaped even greater poverty
in the countryside. By 2030, half of Africa’s
population will live in cities, up from a
third in 2010. According to the UN, two-
thirds of that growth will take place in
slums. Between 1990 and 2014, the conti-

Urban population living in slums, 2014, %

Worse in Afr ica

Sub-
Saharan 
Afr ica

Tanzania

Niger ia

Pakistan

Congo

Ethiopia

Kenya

Angola

25

50

75

South Afr ica

Indonesia

Bangladesh

Nepal

AV ERAG E S

South 
Asia

Source: World Bank

Selected countr ies

0

Ivor y Coast

India

38 Middle East and Afr ica

2 Cops are unwilling to go in, except occa-
sionally to extract bribes or to shoot a sus-
pect. Politicians do enter: an abundance of
unemployed young men are easy recruits
to gangs raised to intimidate opponents.
Perversely, slums are also expensive. In
Mathare options range from a shared space
in a wooden shack on top of an open sew-
er with no water or electricity for 700 shil-
lings per month ($7) to a relatively clean
room in a compound with a light bulb and
a shared outside toilet, for 3,000. That may
seem cheap, but slum landlords are doing
much the same as Western consumer busi-
nesses do in Africa: packaging their pro-
duct up in tiny enough bites for the poor to
aﬀord it. And just as a hundred tiny sachets
of washing powder cost more than a single
large box, so too with land. According to
Jacqueline Klopp, a researcher at Colum-
bia University, per square foot of land rent-
ed, Nairobi’s slum residents could well pay
higher rents than some of the city’s
wealthy expatriate workers. 
Why can’t slums be cleared? African
governments often see slums as an eyesore
and would like to do just that. In Nigeria
the Lagos state government has become
notorious for waking up slum-dwellers on
the most valuable patches of land with
bulldozers. When the government wants
the land, people are simply kicked oﬀ and
expected to ﬁnd new homes. In Kigali,
Rwanda’s spotlessly clean capital, taxi
drivers point out patches of neat grass
where slums have been torn up. Less au-
thoritarian governments, such as Kenya’s,
have tried to “upgrade” slums in situ by
building newer, better housing. 
Yet when slums are demolished, other
ones become more crowded. And new
housing is often too expensive or isolated
from services for slum residents to beneﬁt.
In Kibera, another Nairobi slum where the
government has built smart apartments
nearby, they are lived in by middle-class
newcomers. Those few residents who
were upgraded preferred to sublet their
new homes.
According to Sumila Gulyani, a World
Bank researcher, slums tend to improve
when their residents have an incentive
and the money to invest. If people either
own their property, or rent for long periods,
they spend more on improvements and
take care of their surroundings. Over time,
that can produce better areas. The problem
with many African slums, she says, is that
people rarely live in one place for more
than a few years. While they are there, the
money they make is extracted from them
by landlords and cartels, who have little in-
centive to invest. In many cases, improve-
ments—such as proper piped water—
brought in by well-meaning outsiders are
vandalised by the cartels. 
If government treated slums as real city
districts they might improve. In Mathare
there is some reason to be hopeful. Though

shacks still predominate, some taller build-
ings have been going up, with more space.
In his shack, Crispin Adero, a 20-year-old
construction worker, has plastered the
walls with posters of Manchester City foot-
ball players. Music plays from a television
connection to a satellite tuner. A ladder
leads to an upstairs room, which Mr Adero
shares with his wife. He built it himself,
having made a deal with his landlord to
share the costs. Life, says Mr Adero, “is OK.”
But not everyone has such luck. And out-
side, sewage still runs in the street. 7

Namibia’s economy

Will it be
NEEEFcapped?

W I N D H O E K

The president mulls racial quotas and
expropriation
HAGE GEINGOB is in a bind. After years
of perkiness, Namibia’s economic
growth rate shrank from more than 5% in
2015 to a dismal 0.1% last year—and may
now have stalled completely. But though
President Geingob is an avowed friend of
the market and seeks foreign investors,
populists within his ruling South West Af-
rica People’s Organisation (SWAPO) are
calling for measures that would hobble the
economy still more, by implementing a
draft bill known as the National Equitable
Economic
Empowerment
Framework
(NEEEF). It would knee the business class
in the groin, especially the white part of it,
which still drives the economy.
Under NEEEF, all businesses, however
small, would have to be at least 25%-
owned by “previously disadvantaged per-
sons”, broadly meaning black Namibians.
No company would be allowed to “allot,
issue, or register the transfer of any portion
of its ownership…to a person that is not

The Economist Apr il 22nd 2017

previously disadvantaged or to a domestic
or foreign enterprise owned by a person
that is not previously disadvantaged”. At
least half of all company boards and man-
agement would have to be black, too. 
If NEEEF were enacted, it would proba-
bly be abused by ruling-party bigwigs to
grab stakes in other people’s businesses in
the name of uplifting the previously disad-
vantaged, as has happened in Zimbabwe
and South Africa. Many white-owned
businesses would close, and foreign inves-
tors would shy away. So Mr Geingob, hith-
erto more pragmatic and business-minded
than his two presidential predecessors,
seems loth to go ahead with the bill, ﬁrst
put forward in 2015. But a souring political
mood has revived talk of NEEEF. He has
also spoken recently of expropriating
white-owned land, albeit with fair com-
pensation, another recipe for clobbering
productivity. His prime minister, egged on
by the country’s ﬁrst president, Sam Nu-
joma, who still hankers after the socialism
espoused during SWAPO’s long years in ex-
ile, is said to be a NEEEFer.
Calls for black empowerment resonate
because, although Namibia is deemed a
middle-income country with bountiful re-
serves of minerals (in particular diamonds
and uranium), a tiny population (2.3m) and
a prosperous if small black middle class, it
is also one of the world’s most unequal.
Poverty is rife. Some 40% of the population
still live in shacks. The unemployment
rate, some reckon, is at least 40%. 
Mr Geingob was elected in 2014 with a
whopping 87% of the vote. Yet he is sound-
ing unusually twitchy in the run-up to a
party congress later in the year, at which he
is likely to be re-elected as party leader, but
may ﬁnd a new vice-president breathing
down his neck. 
Aged 75, he hails from a minority group,
the Damara, numbering barely 7% of the
population, whereas power in SWAPO has
in the past been held mainly by the
Ovambo, who account for half of Namib-
ians. Many still look to the wily, ruthless 87-
year-old Mr Nujoma, who ran the party as
a ﬁef for 45 years until his oﬃcial retire-
ment in 2005.

Tr icky time

Namibia, GDP, % increase on a year earlier

1

8

6

4

2

0

2006

07

08 09

10 11 12 13

14

15

16*

Source: IMF

*Estimate

The Economist Apr il 22nd 2017 

Middle East and Afr ica 39

press has been told to ignore them. Many
of the parties that do participate will prob-
ably win—or be granted—some seats, as the
government hopes to gain broad political
support for its austerity measures.
Algeria’s economy grew by 4% last year,
but it has been hit hard by the low price of
oil and gas. Revenues from fuel exports,
which pay for 60% of the government’s
budget, have fallen by nearly half since
2014. In response, the government has cut
spending by 14% this year, after a 9% reduc-
tion last year. It has increased the price of
subsidised fuel and electricity, raised taxes
and frozen public-sector hiring. Still, the
government ran a budget deﬁcit of 12% of
GDP last year, while its foreign reserves
dropped to $114bn, from $196bn in 2014.
As the cost of living rises, Algerians are
growing angry. Inﬂation was 7.6% in Febru-
ary, with subsidy cuts and import restric-
tions pushing up the price of staples such
as food. The unemployment rate sits above
10%; young people have few prospects. The
government, so accustomed to buying sta-
bility with generous handouts, has failed
to prepare Algeria for the hard times. 
The economy is too dependent on oil
and gas and still too centralised. Foreign
energy companies are keen to invest, but
complain of too much red tape. Corrup-
tion is a big problem. Indeed, some of the
candidates running for parliament seek
immunity from prosecution, which is one
of the perks of oﬃce.
Still, Algerians appear to be reluctant to
challenge the government in a signiﬁcant
way. A more serious threat to stability may
come when Mr Bouteﬂika dies. In recent
years he and his allies have purged le pou-
voir of independent ﬁgures and consoli-
dated more power in the presidency. There
appears to be little agreement over who
should succeed him, which is perhaps an-
other reason why he has nominally been
left in charge. Algerian politics have long
been murky. But for a country that prizes
stability, it might help to have stronger and
more transparent institutions. A capable
parliament would be a start. 7

2 One reason for the economy’s sickness
is the collapse of the building industry,
which relied on a string of big government-
funded projects that can no longer be af-
forded. A class of rich black businessmen,
known as “tenderpreneurs”, invariably
well-connected to SWAPO, has beneﬁted
hugely from NEEEF-like contracts. This is
causing resentment in the densely popu-
lated slums of Windhoek, the capital. 
While a chunk of the SWAPO old guard
regards Mr Geingob with suspicion, anoth-
er wing backs a self-styled revolutionary
faction calling for “aﬃrmative reposition-
ing”. One of its leaders, Job Amupanda, a

bearded 29-year-old university lecturer, es-
pouses “Fanonian Marxism with Namib-
ian characteristics”, admires Julius Ma-
lema’s Economic Freedom Fighters in
South Africa and Robert Mugabe in Zimba-
bwe. He also calls for the expropriation of
land. “We want urban land for our youth
and if we don’t get it we’ll take it,” he says. 
Mr Geingob will probably, for the mo-
ment, fend oﬀ his rivals. But it is unclear
whether, in doing so, he will feel obliged to
make populist concessions along the lines
of NEEEF. Most reckon he won’t. If he did,
he might buy himself time, yet send Nam-
ibia’s economy further down the drain. 7

Alger ia

Stability or stagnation?

C A I R O

president’s party, at a rally this month. The
FLN’s allies have played up the army’s ﬁght
against Islamist extremists and a potential
economic crisis to mobilise voters.
Despite the government’s best eﬀorts,
turnout for the vote may be even lower
than in 2012, when only 43% bothered to
cast ballots. Some 12,000 candidates will
compete for 462 seats, but many Algerians
assume that the polls are ﬁxed and that the
FLN and its allies will win by a wide mar-
gin. The party has dominated parliament
since Algeria gained independence from
France in 1962. When Islamists won an
election in 1991, the army annulled the re-
sult, leading to civil war. 
Revisions to the constitution, passed in
2016, ostensibly give the legislature more
power, but it has continued to act as a rub-
ber stamp for the government’s policies.
Many of this year’s candidates have con-
nections to le pouvoir. Several opposition
parties are boycotting the election. The

Algerians see little reason to vote in the coming general election
THE secretive cabal of power brokers
who run Algeria face many challenges.
The economic, political and military elite,
known collectively as le pouvoir (“the pow-
er”), must cure the ailing economy, defeat
jihadists and deal with troublesome neigh-
bours, such as Libya and Mali. At times
they must also reassure the public that
Abdelaziz Bouteﬂika, Algeria’s elderly
president, is still alive.
Mr Bouteﬂika, who is 80, has ruled Al-
geria—alongside le pouvoir—since 1999,
when he was tapped by the army to be
president. But he has suﬀered at least one
stroke in recent years and looks to be in
poor health. In February he cancelled a
meeting with Angela Merkel, Germany’s
chancellor, leading to speculation that he
was dead. To dispel such rumours the gov-
ernment releases footage of Mr Bouteﬂika
at work. In the videos, he stares blankly at
papers or the camera, while his ministers
act impressed.
The president may no longer be of
sound mind, but his continuing presence
says a lot about the state of politics in Alge-
ria, which will hold a general election on
May 4th. Much of the population and,
more importantly, le pouvoir, cling to Mr
Bouteﬂika, who led the country out of a
brutal civil war that raged for most of the
1990s. Since the ﬁghting stopped, Algeria
has avoided the turmoil that plagues its
neighbours. Even in his weakened state,
Mr Bouteﬂika is seen as a stabilising force.
To keep things steady, says the govern-
ment, voters must show up for the coming
poll. “We have to vote massively to rein-
force political and security stability in the
country and oﬀer support for President
Bouteﬂika,” said Djamel Ould Abbas, head
of the National Liberation Front (FLN), the

40 Middle East and Afr ica

Gaza

Hamas divided

Islam’s changing fashions

Don’t say sexy

The Economist Apr il 22nd 2017

G A Z A C I T Y

Moves to improve relations with Israel
run into trouble from the hardliners
AT DAWN earlier this month three men
were led to the gallows in Gaza, the
ﬁrst executions for nearly a year. Hamas,
the Islamist group that controls the strip,
had earlier oﬀered clemency to Palestin-
ians who collaborate with Israel—promis-
ing that the “doors of repentance” would
be open if they confessed. That was the car-
rot. The hangings were the stick.
These are tense times in Gaza, after the
assassination on March 24th of Mazen Fu-
qaha, one of Hamas’ military command-
ers. A native of the West Bank, he was ar-
rested in 2002 for his role in a suicide
bombing in Israel, then freed in a prisoner
swap in 2011 in return for a captured Israeli
soldier, Gilad Shalit. He died in his garage
after an afternoon outing with his family,
shot four times with a silenced pistol. It
was a professional job. The gunmen col-
lected their shell casings and disabled a
nearby security camera. Hamas was quick
to blame Israel.
The men hanged as collaborators with
Israel probably had nothing to do with it:
all three were arrested long before Mr Fu-
qaha’s death. But their hasty executions,
after years languishing in prison, were a
sign of how badly the hit had rattled Ha-
mas. The group imposed a partial closure
at Erez, the sole pedestrian crossing with Is-
rael. It was meant to stop accomplices from
ﬂeeing; but it also blocked sick Palestinians
from travelling for medical treatment. Fish-
ermen were barred from going out on the
water, hurting an industry that supports
thousands of Gazan families.
All of this comes at a diﬃcult time. Ha-
mas is in the middle of its ﬁrst leadership
change in more than a decade, with its vet-
eran head, Khaled Meshal, expected to
step down later this year. After four ruin-
ous wars against Israel, there are signs that
it wants a policy change as well. The group
is debating a major revision of its founding
charter of 1988. Some in the politburo want
Hamas to accept a Palestinian state along
the pre-1967 borders—implicitly acknowl-
edging Israel’s existence—and dump the
worst anti-Semitic language from the origi-
nal. Others appear wedded to confronta-
tion with the Jewish state.
No one expects a handshake with Bin-
yamin Netanyahu. But
Israeli oﬃcials
think the changes are a sign that part of the
political wing is open to a long-term truce
that would avoid another conﬂict. “What
interests me is not what they’re doing, but
the fact that they feel the need to do it,” says

Muslim textile designers are pushing the boundaries of sharia compliance
ISLAMIC fashion websites can be pretty
drab. KhaleejiAbaya.com, an outlet
based in Teesside, North England, plies its
selection of faceless black coverings
under the somewhat overstated slogan
“eﬀortlessly elegant”. Alongside, its
website carries a health warning on the
“dangers of al-tabarruj”, the impermis-
sible exposure of beauty. Defying such
prudishness, leading Muslim designers
recently took part in London Fashion
Week, a global showcase of threads, to
prove that what they called “Modest
Fashion” could be as sleek as a bedtime
story from a Thousand and One Nights.
The organisers avoided the word sexy,
since that would be un-Islamic, ex-
plained one. But their models on the
catwalk wore make-up, nail-polish, and

ﬁgure-hugging costumes. Some had veils,
though these tended to slip from their
heads as they strutted to techno beats.
Abayas were embellished with leather
straps, transforming nun-like uniforms,
said the publicity, into “edgy urban wear
perfect for warrior princesses”. Nearby,
cosmetics companies plied alcohol-free
perfume and lipsticks free of animal fat,
which made the products halal, though
still viewed by some clerics as not sharia-
compliant for being ﬂirtatious.
Islamic fashion could be big business.
Worldwide, Muslims spend close to
$300bn a year on clothes and shoes, only
a bit less than America does, though only
a fraction goes on fashion. In Western
countries, at least, observant Muslim,
Jewish or Christian women who want to
cover their ﬂesh often mix-and-match
from collections which care little for
modesty. That could change. Earlier this
year, Debenhams, a British department
store, began running an Islamic line.
Tommy Hilﬁger and Mango, two high-
street outlets, have both launched Rama-
dan collections for Middle Eastern cli-
entele. An Islamic modelling agency
called Under Wraps has launched in
America. Cities from Basra to Auckland
host Muslim fashion shows. And since
Saudi Arabia, the Muslim world’s most
conservative state, began letting women
add dashes of colour to their blacks
abayas, design has mushroomed.
Yet as they push to enter the main-
stream, Muslim fashionistas are strug-
gling to balance the demands of Islamic
law with those of a style-driven market.
One Saudi woman, who leads a secular
life in London, found it hypocritical.
“They are wearing pyjamas, as if they are
dressed for going to bed,” she sniﬀed.
“Modesty make-up is a contradiction in
terms.” Another questioned why the
addition of headscarf made tight jeans
“Islamic”. There is, it seems, a way to go.

Keeping covered

one intelligence oﬃcial. 
Hamas has also begun to mend its
strained relationship with Egypt, which
has long accused the group of aiding Islam-
ist militants in Sinai. Cairo imposed a mil-
itary blockade on the strip after Hamas
seized power there in 2007: Rafah, the sole
border crossing accessible to most Gazans,
was open for just 48 days last year. But in
February Egypt opened it to commercial
traﬃc, allowing trucks to cross for the ﬁrst
time. This came after Hamas promised to
stop treating wounded jihadists in Gaza.

Yet Hamas’s military wing depends on
smuggling tunnels controlled by the same
jihadists to replenish its arsenal. In the
wake of Mr Fuqaha’s assassination, they
have begun rattling the sabre at Israel. Bill-
boards with his likeness have gone up
around the strip: “Challenge accepted,”
reads one, in Arabic and Hebrew. The
group also released a video threatening to
kill senior Israeli army oﬃcials. For now,
their only retaliation has been against oth-
er Palestinians. But the uneasy ceaseﬁre
that ended the last war is looking fragile. 7

S P E C I A L R E P O R T
S P E C I A L R E P O R T

A S I A N G E O P O L I T I C S
A S I A N G E O P O L I T I C S

April 22nd 2017

Disorder 
under heaven

The world’s turned.turned

From politics to technology, tectonic shifts are transforming the global landscape. 
Keep a level head with clear thinking on world a(cid:31) airs.

SUBSCR IBERS EN JOY:

Espresso

Yet to subscribe? Visit Economist .com/clearthinking to get started with our 
introductory o(cid:31) er and enjoy access across print, online, audio and via our apps .

 
S P E C I A L R E P O R T

A S I A N G E O P O L I T I C S

Disorder under heaven

After seven decades of hegemony in Asia, Amer ica now has to
accommodate an increasingly power ful China, says Dominic
Ziegler. How will the two countr ies manage that?

THE LAST TIME China considered itself as powerful as it does today,
Abraham Lincoln was in the White House. At that time, and against the
mounting evidence of Western depredations, the emperor still clung to
the age-old belief that China ruled all under heaven, a world order unto
itself. It never had allies in the Western sense, just nations that paid tri-
bute to it in exchange for trade. Both China and “the outside countries”,
he wrote to Lincoln, constitute “one family, without any distinction”.
Today, after a century and a half that encompassed Western imperi-
al occupation, republican turmoil, the plunder of warlords, Japanese in-
vasion, civil war, revolutionary upheaval and, more recently, phenome-
nal economic growth, China has resumed its own sense of being a great
power. It has done so in a very diﬀerent world: one led by America. For
three-quarters of a century, America has been the hegemon in East Asia,
China’s historical backyard.
But now China is indisputably back. New towers have transformed
the skylines of even its farthest-ﬂung cities. An ultra-modern network of
bullet trains has, in a few short years, shrunk a continent-sized country.
China’s new power rests on a 20-fold increase in economic output since
the late 1970s, when pragmatic leaders set in train market-led reforms.
Over the same period the number of Chinese people living in extreme
poverty, as deﬁned by the World Bank, has fallen to 80m, a tenth of what
it used to be. China is the world’s biggest trading nation and its second-
biggest economy after America. There is hardly a country in the world to
which it does not matter, either as a source of consumer goods or as a des-
tination for commodities, capital goods and investment. 
On all these counts, China wants—and deserves—a greater role in
East Asia and in the global order. America has to make room for it. But the
task will require wisdom and a subtle balance of ﬁrmness and ﬁnesse on
both sides. A ﬁrst indication of what to expect was on display at a summit
between Xi Jinping and Donald Trump on April 6th and 7th at Mar-a-

C O N T E N T S

6 Pax Amer icana

An archipelago of empire

7 Push to the Paciﬁc

The Amer ican lake

8 Pax Sinica

The travails of a regional
hegemon

9 Asian neighbours

When elephants ﬁght

11 The r isk of conﬂict

Avoiding the trap

1

A list of sources is at

Economist.com/specialreports

3

A C K N O W L E D G M E N T S

In addition to those quoted in the
repor t, the author would like to
thank: Julie Bishop, Chan Heng
Chee, Aaron Connelly, Rebecca
Fabr izi, Sem Fabr izi, Graham
Fletcher, Foo Chi Hsia, Allan Gyngell,
Gerard Ho, Peter Jennings, Jia
Qingguo, Bilahar i Kausikan, Susan
Lawrence, Liu Weidong, Evan
Medeiros, Douglas Paal, Andrew
Shearer, Tomohiko Taniguchi,
Michael Wesley, Penny Wong, Xie
Yanmei and Tong Zhao. The author is
also grateful for the insights of some
who wished to go unnamed.

The Economist Apr il 22nd 2017 

4

The Economist Apr il 22nd 2017

S P E C I A L R E P O R T

A S I A N G E O P O L I T I C S

2

1

Lago, the American president’s Florida golﬁng resort. Though lit-
tle of substance was discussed, Mr Trump hailed the bilateral re-
lationship as “outstanding” and Mr Xi declared there were “a
thousand reasons to get the China-US relationship right”. Nei-
ther mentioned the cruise-missile strike America had just
launched against a Syrian air base. Nor was there any talk of im-
minently imposing tariﬀs. 
For all the superﬁcial bonhomie at the summit, the two
countries see things very diﬀerently. China’s system of politics,
both bureaucratic and authoritarian, has helped economic de-
velopment at home, but is alien to American notions of democ-
racy. American policymakers have traditionally seen liberal
democratic values and an emphasis on human rights as factors
that legitimise and strengthen the international order. Chinese
policymakers see them as Western conspiracies to foster the kind
of colour revolutions that brought down authoritarian former
Soviet regimes, and might attempt to do the same in China.
Chinese strategists consider the country’s rapidly moder-
nising armed forces as essential for protecting the sea lanes on
which its prosperity and security depend. They think a powerful
navy is needed to keep potential adversaries from China’s
shores and stop them from grabbing Chinese-occupied islands.
They also suspect that America’s massive military presence in
the Asia-Paciﬁc region is designed to check China’s rise. 
American strategists, by contrast, say their country must
keep a presence in the region because Chinese hard power un-
settles America’s friends in East and South-East Asia. In the past
few years China has challenged Japan over the Japanese-con-
trolled Senkaku Islands (which the Chinese call the Diaoyu Is-
lands), and carried out extensive construction works to build
bases and runways on disputed rocks and reefs in the South Chi-
na Sea. Those American strategists suspect China of wanting to
turn the vast sea into a Chinese lake; and, more broadly, of seek-
ing dominance in East Asia and overturning the existing order.

A rock and a hard place

America has long sought to prevent any one power having
hegemony in Asia, whereas China wants to keep potential ad-
versaries far from its shores. Somehow, they have to ﬁnd a way of
accommodating each other’s overarching goals, as Henry Kissin-
ger explains in his classic book on statecraft, “World Order”.
Peace hangs on the outcome.

That peace cannot be taken for grant-
ed. In much of East Asia, history is unﬁn-
ished business. Taiwan, to which the
Nationalist losers in China’s civil war ﬂed
in 1949, is a thriving and peaceful democ-
racy. Yet China’s Communist Party sees its
sacred mission as bringing Taiwan back
into the motherland’s fold, and reserves
the right to use force to do so. American
guardianship of the island is meant to en-
sure that China never dares. But as Chi-
nese might grows and American commit-
ment appears to wane, the room for
miscalculation grows. Soon after his elec-
tion Mr Trump even seemed to be calling
into question America’s endorsement of
the “one-China policy”—China’s insis-
tence on the polite ﬁction that Taiwan is
part of China. 
A potentially more imminent ﬂash-
point in the region is the Korean peninsu-
la, divided since the end of the second
world war. North Korea, ruled by a family
maﬁa now in its third generation, has a broken economy and an
ill-trained army. But it has poured money into nuclear pro-
grammes that threaten South Korea, unnerve Japan and before
long will also pose a threat to America. North Korea exasperates
China’s leaders, yet they feel they must show solidarity to a for-
mer ally against America in the bloody war North Korea
launched in 1950. China would rather have a nuclear North Ko-
rea under Kim Jong Un than a failed state sending millions of des-
perate refugees across the Chinese border. Above all, it is trou-
bled by the idea of a uniﬁed, democratic Korea with American
troops next door. At Mar-a-Lago, Mr Trump asked Mr Xi for ideas
to deal with the threat from North Korea, but his missile strike in
Syria made it clear that America might act alone against the
North. Handling Mr Kim’s belligerence—and the regime’s even-
tual demise—will be a huge test of great-power co-operation.
Yet conﬂict between China and America is not inevitable.
Both sides want to avoid it and can adjust accordingly. It helps
that habits of co-operation have become established over four
decades of Chinese market reforms, which could not have hap-
pened without American security guaranteeing China’s exter-
nal environment. Theirs is the world’s most important bilateral
economic relationship today, with combined annual trade add-
ing up to $600bn and investment in each other’s economies to-
talling around $350bn.
China has no missionary zeal or ambitions to export revo-
lution, nor indeed any grave ideological misgivings about the
current order, which it resents chieﬂy because it does not have a
greater say in running it. Ensuring more of a role appears to be
the chief mission of Mr Xi, China’s paramount leader since 2012.
He has accrued more authority to himself than any leader since
the late Deng Xiaoping, and is now gingerly putting forward a
model for greater global leadership which party theorists are
starting to call the “China solution”. At one level, this is about
practical matters, such as investing in Central Asia to reduce pov-
erty. At another, it is about opposing American dominance. Chi-
na, Mr Xi told a conference in February, should “guide interna-
tional security” towards a “more just and rational new world
order”. That kind of language is redolent of the old imperial Chi-
nese virtues. But whereas China’s previous experience of power
was of ruling all under heaven, it now has to accept being merely
one great power among several. America, for its part, has never
had any experience of ceding as much inﬂuence and authority as

KYRGYZSTAN

Hainan

BRUNEI

PAP
NE
GUIN

EAST
T IMOR

PAKISTAN

I R A N

OMAN

BHUTAN

 BANGLADESH

K A Z A K H S T A N

NEPAL 

Hong Kong
Hanoi

Shanghai

Sasebo

Misawa

Tokyo
Yokosuka

SINGAPORE

AUSTRALIA

Delhi

Taipei

Guam
(to US)

Okinawa

TAJIKISTAN

AFGHAN-
ISTAN

TIBET
AUTONOMOUS
REGION

TURK

M
E
I

N

S
T

A

N

U
Z

B
E

K

I

S

T

A

N

The
Gulf

s
a
C

p

i

a
e
S
n
a

Spratly
Islands

Paracel
Islands
Scarborough
Shoal

Gwadar

Hambantota

Kyaukphyu

2

n

d

Taiwan
$9.8
1st Island Chain
215
P A C I F I C
O C E A N
ain
1,657
 Isla n d C h
Philippines
$2.5
125
131

Malaysia 
Andaman and
Nicobar Islands
$4.2
(to INDIA)
109
Malacca Strait
52

B a y o f
B e n g a l

A r a b i a n
S e a

Taiwan
Strait
South
China Sea

East
China
Sea

I N D I A N
O C E A N

S Korea
$33.8
630
4,500
Okinawa

Senkaku/
Diaoyu
Islands

MONGOLIA

R U S S I A

K A Z A K H S T A N

I R A N

Y E M E N
DJIBOUT I

O M A N

AFGHAN-
ISTAN

PAK-
ISTAN

S A U D I
A R A B I A

THAI.
CAM.

LAOS

MYAN-
MAR

SRI LANKA

Beijing

Tokyo

Diego Garcia

T

h

e

G

u

l
f

1,500 km

India
$51.1
1,395
1,155

China
$145.0
2,183
510

Japan
$47.3
247
56

Australia
$24.2
58
21

Indonesia
$8.2
396
400

Singapore
$10.2
73
313

Vietnam
$4.0
482
5,000

na
1,190
600

United States
$604.5
1,347
865

N Korea

Chinese ports
Selected US
militar y
installations

Defence budget, $bn
Active forces, ’000
Reser v ists, ’000

Source: IISS, 2016

 
 
2

it may have to do to China in future.
An already fraught relationship has become more so with
Mr Trump’s election as president. For seven decades America’s
grand strategy has rested upon three pillars: open trade, strong
alliances and the promotion of human rights and democratic
values. It is not clear to America’s friends in Asia to what extent
Mr Trump, with his disdain for diplomatic process, a protection-
ist streak and a narrow “America ﬁrst” deﬁnition of the national
interest, is prepared to uphold those three pillars. As Michael Ful-
lilove, head of the Lowy Institute, a think-tank in Sydney, puts it,
Mr Trump is “an unbeliever in the global liberal order and a scep-
tic of alliances. And he has a crush on authoritarians.”
Mr Trump’s victory came as a huge shock to China’s lead-
ers. They hate unpredictability and would have much preferred
Hillary Clinton, the devil they knew. It also came at an inconve-
nient time for the Chinese. Mr Xi is focusing on a crucial ﬁve-
yearly Communist Party congress later this year. He appears set
on consolidating his grip on power, against a backdrop of an un-
settling credit bubble and economic growth that has slowed
sharply from a peak of 10% a year to just 6.5%. 
For the most part, China has concealed its alarm over Mr
Trump behind studied caution. “When you see 10,000 changes
around you,” Chinese leaders told Kevin Rudd, an Australian for-
mer prime minister and China hand, citing one of their lan-
guage’s countless proverbs, “ensure you yourself don’t change.”
China’s leaders have decided to wait and see. But behind the
scenes they have been trying hard to inﬂuence Mr Trump, work-
ing mainly through his son-in-law, Jared Kushner, a property de-
veloper with Chinese ties.
The Chinese also soon grasped the new president’s transac-
tional approach, prompting them to dispatch Jack Ma, the boss of
Alibaba, an e-commerce giant, to meet him. He promised that his
ﬁrm would generate 1m jobs in America. Soon afterwards trade-
mark applications to protect the Trump brand in China that had
languished in the courts for years were suddenly granted. Cause
and eﬀect are impossible to disentangle, but Mr Trump has cer-
tainly toned down his pre-election anti-China rhetoric. 

Looking into the abyss

Yet deep, abiding uncertainties about the two countries’ re-
lationship remain, not least over trade, which for three decades
has underpinned relations between the two countries. Mr
Trump appears to view trade not as mutually beneﬁcial to all
parties but as a zero-sum game, and gives short shrift to the post-
war multilateral trading system. One of the ﬁrst things he did
after coming to oﬃce was to cancel the Trans-Paciﬁc Partnership

Too open?

United States goods trade with China, $bn

S
T

R
O
P
X
E

S
T

R
O
P

M

I

Trade balance

200

100

+

0

–

100

200

300

400

500

1985

90

95

2000

05

10

16

Source: Census Bureau

The Economist Apr il 22nd 2017 

S P E C I A L R E P O R T

A S I A N G E O P O L I T I C S

*

100

China

0

21

*Forecast

Source: IMF

Other Asia

75

50

25

At market pr ices

Rest of world

United States

European
Union

1980 90 2000 10

World GDP, % share of total

No longer far apart

(TPP), a free-trade agreement
among 12 countries in the Asia-
Paciﬁc region (though not Chi-
na)—a big blow to America’s
economic role in Asia. 
More broadly, the world
view of some of Mr Trump’s ad-
visers encompasses a Mani-
chean expectation of conﬂict.
They claim that China is so set
on strategic rivalry with Ameri-
ca that military conﬂict is inev-
itable, and argue that the best
way to protect the national in-
terest is to spend more money
on the armed forces and less on
diplomacy. Such people do not
have a monopoly on the inter-
nal debate about America’s stra-
tegic relationship with China,
any more than they do on trade. As this special report went to
press, an alternative approach to trade, involving a robust multi-
lateralism, was gaining favour. Meanwhile James Mattis, the de-
fence secretary, on his ﬁrst trip to Asia in early February urged
care when challenging Chinese construction in the South China
Sea with military force, and emphasised the primacy of diplo-
macy over military action in resolving diﬀerences. 
Mr Mattis, a well-rounded former general, is what Wash-
ington’s seasoned hands call one of the administration’s
“grown-ups”, but there are precious few of them. The secretary
of state, Rex Tillerson, a former oil boss, was counted among
them, though question marks have since been raised about his
Asia diplomacy. And although every new administration takes
time to ﬁll vacant posts, the gaps in the Trump foreign-policy
team, especially on the Asia desks, are alarming. Among other
things, almost all the Republican party’s seasoned Asia hands,
who during the Obama years were working in think-tanks, uni-
versities or the private sector, swore before the election that they
would never serve under a President Trump. Some have since
swallowed their pride and moved closer to the new administra-
tion, but Mr Trump’s henchmen have long memories when it
comes to criticism of their boss. 
Many observers still hope that, once an unusually chaotic
new administration sorts itself out, it will revert to a policy that
ﬂows recognisably from America’s seven decades of experience
in Asia. But that is far from certain. Some of the administration’s
leading members hold seemingly irreconcilable views on Amer-
ican policy in Asia. Perhaps that reﬂects broader American dis-
agreement about global roles and responsibilities. Yet the presi-
dent himself seems unaware of the lack of any comprehensive
strategy in Asia, and that problem may persist. A Republican
Asia hand who served under both Ronald Reagan and George
H.W. Bush explains that “I don’t get a sense of a learning curve
with Trump. So I don’t expect things to get any better.”
Amid all this uncertainty about Mr Trump’s policy in Asia,
the two chief risks for the region appear almost contradictory.
The ﬁrst is that, after an initial honeymoon with Chinese leaders,
an increasingly aggressive stand by the new administration
raises Chinese hackles while failing to reassure America’s Asian
friends. The second is that American policy in Asia becomes
half-hearted and disengaged, again unsettling Asian friends and
perhaps emboldening China. The consequences in either case
might be similar—shifting power dynamics that require rapid ad-
justments, risking instability and even regional turmoil. Hope
for the best, but prepare for disorder under heaven. 7

5

S P E C I A L R E P O R T

A S I A N G E O P O L I T I C S

Pax Amer icana

An archipelago of
empire

How Amer ica came to be Asia’s indispensable power

THE POINT IS obvious but no less extraordinary for that:
even though America is not of Asia, it has been the region’s
hegemon for more than seven decades. Any change in its pos-
ture under Donald Trump might not be much noticed at home,
but its implications in the region would be quickly felt.
America’s presence draws its justiﬁcation, as Rana Mitter of
Oxford university puts it, from the sacriﬁces made by American
troops to recover the region from Japan during the second world
war. Only North Korea challenges America’s claim to a legiti-
mate presence there, and even in its hate-spewing rhetoric you
can detect an admiration for the Americans. 
The hard element of American power is embodied in the
United States Paciﬁc Command (PACOM), based in Hawaii and
watching over what it calls the Indo-Asia-Paciﬁc: a region from
the Arabian Gulf in the west to the Galapagos Islands in the east,
from northern Japan to the Southern Ocean, extending to 100m
square miles (260m square kilometres) and 14 time zones. Power
takes the form of military bases and listening posts strung out
across the Paciﬁc and Indian Oceans, from Alaska to South Korea
to Australia to Diego Garcia. 
As for East Asia, the Seventh Fleet, perhaps the world’s
most powerful ﬁghting unit, with over 60 ships, 140 aircraft and
40,000 sailors and marines, is based in Yokosuka, south of To-
kyo. One-ﬁfth of Okinawa, the main island of Japan’s southern-
most archipelago, is given over to American forces. For the

Making a splash in Okinawa

6

28,500 American troops in South Korea, the demilitarised zone
at the border with North Korea is the world’s last cold-war trip-
wire: one move across it by Kim Jong Un’s forces would meet
with instant retribution.
Bruce Cumings of the University of Chicago refers to Amer-
ican power as a globe-girdling “archipelago of empire”, with
most of America’s 800 bases in or near the Paciﬁc. In Okinawa
the American outposts have a whiﬀ of strained cross-cultural re-
lations about them: young, bored oﬀ-duty servicemen in custo-
mised pick-ups cruising the mall road, forlorn bars run by
“Mama-san”, marriage counselling promoted on the forces’ tele-
vision station. Yet supported by a huge and sophisticated de-
fence industry back home, the archipelago still packs a punch.
Last September the PACOM commander, Admiral Harry Harris,
talking about American military hardware, boasted that “every-
thing that’s new and cool is coming to the region,” including a
new Zumwalt class of stealth destroyer straight out of “Star
Trek”—and a Captain James Kirk as its commander to boot.
Extraordinary, too, how little changed is the structure of
American power laid down for the region at the end of the war
by General Douglas MacArthur, acting like an imperial viceroy.
From the outset, Japan, South Korea and Taiwan—or at ﬁrst,
Chiang Kai-shek and his Kuomintang or Nationalists—became
America’s main East Asian allies. Australia and New Zealand
were the staunch English-speaking friends. All remain America’s
key partners today. British, French, Portuguese and Dutch em-
pires have crumbled. The Soviet Union has gone. Of the original
threats in the region, only North Korea’s remains, and American
forces are still there to contain it. Yet not just on the Korean penin-
sula but across Asia, America remains the indispensable power,
a linchpin for regional stability, democracy and free trade. 
East Asia’s stunning development path owed much to the
nature of American power and of the region’s structure of alli-
ances, producing economic successes that have never been
matched elsewhere. The United States not only guaranteed the
security of Japan, South Korea and Tai-
wan, allowing them to focus on economic
development; it also provided them with
the incalculable advantages of technical
assistance, educational exchanges and
nearly unfettered access to America’s vast
markets. Crucially, it did not, at least ini-
tially, insist that these countries open their
own markets in return.
Japan was the ﬁrst to take oﬀ as its
people swapped military uniforms for sa-
rariman suits in pursuit of single-minded
economic reconstruction. South Korea
and Taiwan followed. They threw every-
thing into building competitive export-
oriented manufacturing bases, shutting
foreign competitors out of their markets.
Through what later came to be known as
“ﬁnancial repression”, they used capital
controls, cheap exchange rates and subsi-
dised loans to channel money into cor-
porate investment and state infrastruc-
ture. By 1967 Japan was the world’s
second-biggest economy. Only then did
Japan’s partially closed markets become a
growing bone of contention in America. 
Arthur Kroeber, an expert on the
Chinese economy (and a former contribu-
tor to The Economist), points out that
American power profoundly shaped 

The Economist Apr il 22nd 2017

1

S P E C I A L R E P O R T

A S I A N G E O P O L I T I C S

2

these East Asian allies in another respect: the nature of their poli-
tics. Over time, the need for their patron’s approval forced them
to adopt democratically accountable political systems. Japan’s
was foisted on it by its American occupiers. On Taiwan, Chiang
Kai-shek’s son, Chiang Ching-kuo, started moving the island to-
wards representative politics in the 1980s in response to the
shock of America normalising its relations with Communist Chi-
na. In South Korea, America put up with military dictatorship
during the cold war, but probably would not have tolerated it
after the fall of the Berlin Wall. As it happened, protests leading
up to the 1988 Olympics in Seoul ushered in the restoration of civ-
il liberties and direct presidential elections. Today all three coun-
tries are among Asia’s staunchest democracies.

The Chinese policeman

What was not expected at the outset was China’s with-
drawal from the post-war Asian order. During the war Chiang
Kai-shek’s Kuomintang forces had not defeated the Japanese, but
for eight long years they had bravely tied down Japanese armies
in China, at the cost of 14m Chinese dead. That made China an
American ally and a victor. Franklin Roosevelt wanted it to take
its place as a sovereign power, one of the world’s “four police-
men”, as he put it. He, Chiang Kai-shek and Winston Churchill

had met in Cairo in 1943 to make this happen. What no one had
counted on was that China’s Communists under Mao Zedong
would use the Nationalists’ war exhaustion and growing popu-
lar disenchantment to rekindle a smouldering civil war in which
they swept to victory in 1949. The following year, far from being
an ally, China was ﬁghting against America on the Korean penin-
sula (where Mao’s own son was killed in battle). It took two de-
cades for China to come out of its shell when America’s then
president, Richard Nixon, paid a visit to Beijing. 
The ground for China’s opening to America was prepared
by a rupture in its relations with the Soviet Union in 1960. For
over four decades it has been an unambiguous beneﬁciary of the
American order. Without America to keep its neighbourhood se-
cure and underpin open markets, China could not have reaped
such gains from the market-led reforms it launched in the late
1970s. It beneﬁted from being geographically close to the eco-
nomic dynamism and the distribution networks of the East
Asian tigers. Lacking the American allies’ access to Western mar-
kets, management and technology, China threw itself open to
foreign investment—a remarkably pragmatic surrender of eco-
nomic sovereignty. But now that China has become richer and
more powerful, its aspirations to regional leadership and even
hegemony are growing stronger. After all, it, too, won the war. 7

The American lake

A br ief histor y of how Manifest Destiny came to reside in the Paciﬁc 

FOR MOST OF its history, Amer ica has been
isolationist. Those who now worry about it
turning away from its ideals of free trade and
an internationalist outlook may forget how
recent they are, born out of cold-war neces-
sity. By contrast, Amer ica’s much older
sense of its own exceptionalism was nur-
tured by turning consciously west, away
from European monarchy, class and conﬂict.
It was a “wester ing” people to whom the
novus ordo seclorum impr inted on every
dollar bill applied. They ﬁrst crossed the vast
Nor th Amer ican continent, and when they
ran out of land, Manifest Destiny took to the
sea, unrolling an expanding Amer ican
frontier across the Paciﬁc.
The discovery of gold in California in
1848 changed everything. Not only was the
gold rush the ﬁrst of California’s many
booms; it shif ted global perspectives, spur-
r ing Karl Marx to star t work on “Das Kapital”
and rekindling hopes of long-distance
commerce across the Paciﬁc. Amer ican
traders set oﬀ by sea, accompanied by
missionar ies, guano miners, planters and
expeditionary forces. By the end of the 19th
century the theor ies of Alfred Thayer Mahan,
a great naval strategist who argued for
decisive Amer ican sea power, had taken
hold. Colonies, protectorates and incor-
porated terr itor ies soon followed.
Hawaii, with its superb por t, Pearl
Harbour, was the ﬁrst Paciﬁc terr itory to

come under Amer ican sway; the kingdom
was eventually annexed in 1898. That same
year Amer ican forces seized the Philippines
as par t of a jingoistic war with Spain that
had begun in Havana. Af ter an easy victory
over the Spanish in Manila, the Amer icans
found themselves ﬁghting a counter-insur-
gency against Filipinos seeking their own
republic. The president of the day, William
McKinley, was at a loss to know what to do
with the new Philippine terr itor ies. But
while praying for guidance one sleepless
night, it came to him that Amer ica’s mission
was to “uplif t and civilise and Chr istianise”.
McKinley had stumbled into empire
with “no more backbone than a chocolate
éclair”, as Theodore Roosevelt, a fan of
muscular imper ialism, put it. The muscular
school soon took charge. “Benevolent
assimilation” would supposedly raise Filipi-
nos to a higher plane. The generals in the
Philippine campaign had nearly all earned
their spurs ﬁghting native Amer icans. In the
tropics they applied the same genocidal
techniques of terror, atrocities and native
reservations. In three years of ﬁghting,
between 200,000 and 700,000 men, women
and children died as a consequence of
Amer ican brutality.
Af ter early victor ies, the campaign
turned into quicksand (with haunting ech-
oes in Vietnam, Afghanistan and Iraq). In
the southern Philippines, Amer ican troops

were ﬁghting Muslim insurgents long af ter
the rest of the archipelago had been pac-
iﬁed—and Amer ican special forces are still
in Mindanao today.
The Amer ican violence, and decades of
condescending racism that followed, go
some way towards explaining a vein of
anti-Amer icanism that resur faces from time
to time in a country that also admires Amer i-
ca. The two emotions live in the same Philip-
pine breast, says Malcolm Cook of the In-
stitute of Southeast Asian Studies in
Singapore. The ill-feeling was evident in the
early 1990s, when the senate voted to eject
Amer ican forces from Philippine bases; and,
more recently, in President Rodr igo Du-
ter te’s sudden pivot to China last year, and
in his labelling of President Barack Obama as
a “son of a bitch”.
Most Amer icans are blithely unaware
of the back story, viewing Mr Duter te’s
behaviour as astonishing ingratitude to-
wards an ally that, until Philippine indepen-
dence in 1946, had tr ied to pour its protégé’s
society into an Amer ican mould, and that
had remained a close fr iend since. But
near-ignorance about the essentially impe-
r ialising mission that brought Amer ica to
the region in the ﬁrst place hardly helps an
understanding of its position in Asia today.
One lesson is that the case for a continued
Amer ican presence in Asia has to be con-
stantly remade.

The Economist Apr il 22nd 2017 

7

S P E C I A L R E P O R T

A S I A N G E O P O L I T I C S

Pax Sinica

The travails of a
regional hegemon

China’s status among its neighbours is not keeping
up with its growing power 

ONCE, HAINAN WAS an alien, pestilential land, beyond
the edge of civilisation, to which mandarins who had fallen
foul of the emperor were banished. Today China’s island prov-
ince in the far south is being rebranded as the country’s own
tropical paradise. Hainan can also be viewed as emblematic of
much of what “China’s rise”, a much-used if often ill-deﬁned
phrase, actually means. 
A decade ago, when this correspondent ﬁrst visited the
place, cars crept along muddy, potholed roads. Today an express-
way whisks travellers from the top to the bottom of the 33,900-
square-kilometre island in under four hours—or 82 minutes by
bullet train. In the old days the town of Wenchang in Hainan’s
north-east was famous for its poached chicken. Today it is fam-
ous for a state-of-the-art satellite and spacecraft launch site.
Down the coast, in the middle of a manicured plain, is a
convention complex in which China’s leaders each spring host
the Boao Forum, often described as Asia’s Davos. The talk is all
about “mutual respect”, “win-win” relationships and “common
destiny” in Asia. But the billions of dollars for initiatives in the re-
gion, including for much-needed infrastructure, come predomi-
nantly from China. And the staging of the forum seems designed
to convey a sense that Asian leaders and foreign dignitaries are
paying tribute to the rulers of a benign imperium. 
It is meant to inspire awe, and so too are the luxury hotels
going up along the huge half-moon beach outside Sanya in Hai-
nan’s far south. The scale of these resorts dwarfs those in Hawaii
or Florida. The subliminal message from Hainan is that “any-
thing you can do, China can do better—and bigger.”
But Hainan also reveals a harder side to Chinese power.
Hidden around a headland in Sanya is the Yulin naval base.
Enormous caverns have been cut, Bond-style, into the mountain-
side, big enough to hide 20 ballistic-missile submarines. The har-
bour is deep enough for aircraft-carriers (at present China has
only one of those, but plans to build more).
Sanya is the point in China closest to the edge of the conti-
nental shelf and the deeps of the South China Sea. Its strategic

China wants to be viewed with wonder and respect but,
as it grows stronger and more power ful, it as of ten
unsettles as it reassures

importance is obvious. More than half the world’s merchant ton-
nage passes through the South China Sea. The Malacca Strait
takes three times as much tanker traﬃc as the Suez Canal and 15
times as much as the Panama Canal. China’s sweeping maritime
claims—though based on no recognised legal norms, and disput-
ed by neighbours—encompass almost the entire sea.
Over the past three years China has used a rapidly expand-
ing navy and coastguard to enforce its claims to reefs and rocks
far out at sea. It has employed dredging ﬂeets to build artiﬁcial is-
lands and runways on them. This oﬃcial policy is backed by un-
oﬃcial force. In Tanmen, a gritty harbour next to Boao, large

The other side of Hainan

trawlers act as a “people’s maritime militia”. They have chased
Philippine and Vietnamese ﬁshermen from disputed grounds,
poached in neighbours’ exclusive economic zones and, with oﬃ-
cialdom turning a blind eye, ravaged the South China Sea’s reefs,
destroying the coral to get at rare, slow-growing giant clams for
which China’s nouveaux riches pay fortunes.
All this unnerves China’s neighbours (of which more later).
Hainan is a microcosm of a wider problem: China wants to be
viewed with wonder and respect but, as it grows stronger and
more powerful, it as often unsettles as it reassures.

No one said for ever

When Deng Xiaoping counselled his compatriots to “lie
low and bide your time”, none of them thought he meant for
ever. Indeed, it was not long after his death in 1997 that China’s
presence increasingly made itself felt abroad. First, the govern-
ment began to encourage state companies to invest around the
world, especially in the mineral resources
needed for the country’s growing indus-
trial surge. After a slow start, such invest-
ment now runs at about $80bn a year. 
A sharp turn in foreign-policy activ-
ism, however, came with Mr Xi’s rise to
power ﬁve years ago. The new territorial
assertiveness is part of it. But so, too, is a
charm oﬀensive, using economic power as a tool of reassurance. 
In 2014 Mr Xi brought together several regional infrastruc-
ture initiatives under the rubric of “One Belt, One Road”. The
“belt”, confusingly, is a “New Silk Road”: a set of roads, railways
and power projects aiming to tie China’s western regions more
closely to Central Asia and eventually to Europe. In January, with
much fanfare, a Chinese freight service travelled this route all the
way from Yiwu, in Zhejiang province, to London. (It took 18 days,
with the freight having to change train several times because of
diﬀerent rail gauges, laying bare how much of a work in progress
the belt is.) The “road” part of the rubric, equally confusingly, is a 

8

The Economist Apr il 22nd 2017

1

2

“Maritime Silk Road” intended to link China’s landlocked south-
west to South-East Asia, the Indian Ocean and beyond. 
Part of the idea is to drum up business for Chinese engin-
eering ﬁrms that are facing a sharp slowdown and overcapacity
at home. But in the main the Silk Road strategies are presented as
Mr Xi’s gift to a region in need of infrastructure—the foreign di-
mension of his “China dream” of a rise to pre-eminence. To ﬁ-
nance these projects, a “Silk Road Fund” under the central bank
was set up, along with the New Development Bank and Mr Xi’s
new multilateral institution, the Asian Infrastructure Investment
Bank (AIIB), with a combined authorised capital of $240bn.
“One Belt, One Road” resonates with the historical notion
of bringing barbarians under the Chinese heaven. But to many
Americans, the Silk Road initiatives, and the AIIB in particular,
smack of a powerful new order in the making in which China
rather than the United States will call the shots. Barack Obama’s
administration urged allies not to join the AIIB. Japan heeded the
call; Australia, Britain and South Korea ignored it. 
It is easy to overstate the importance of such Chinese initia-
tives. Arthur Kroeber, in his book “China’s Economy: What
Everyone Needs to Know”, reckons that the headline ﬁgures for
the authorised capital of China’s new ﬁnancial institutions great-
ly exaggerate their ﬁrepower. The actual combined capital base
may be just $40bn-50bn by the early 2020s. That is, admittedly,
about the size of the World Bank. But the value of that institution
lies less in the money it disburses than in its deep technical and
intellectual resources. China’s new institutions cannot draw on
anything comparable.
The Silk Road strategy appears to involve extending Chi-
na’s utilitarian domestic model for infrastructure (under which
locals aﬀected by large-scale development are barely consulted)
to the wider world. That would be risky. Some Chinese experts
worry about an investment frenzy, including from local-level
state enterprises with little experience of operating abroad.
“Provinces, cities: they all want to go abroad. There is disorder,”
says Ding Yifan of the State Council’s Development Research
Centre in Beijing. Other researchers in Beijing warn that little
thought has been given to the political risks and security con-
cerns involved in putting Chinese projects and workers in brittle
countries in Central Asia, or in the $50bn China-Pakistan Eco-
nomic Corridor, a set of infrastructure projects in Pakistan
launched by the two governments amid much publicity in 2015.
Andrew Small, an expert on China-Pakistan relations at the
German Marshall Fund, in a recent article warned of the short-
comings of the approach. One of them is lack of transparency.
Even Pakistan’s central-bank governor says he does not under-
stand where all the trumpeted money is coming from and how it
is being spent. Another is insuﬃcient regard for grassroots sup-
port and for the social impact of projects. Chinese leaders do not
need to pay much heed to this at home, but in a poor and insur-
gency-torn region such as Balochistan it could be explosive. “Chi-
nese oﬃcials still lack the instinct to take measures of this sort,”
Mr Small concludes.

Searching for soft power

In their open-handed approach to China’s periphery, Mr Xi
and his fellow leaders have America in mind. They hope that
countries brought into China’s developmental embrace will feel
less willing to remain part of the American-led order of regional
security. Yet buying power is not that simple. Closeness to local
elites can stir popular hostility. In Myanmar in 2011 resentment of
China’s outsized commercial activities, and the small number of
generals beneﬁting from them, inﬂuenced even the military re-
gime, leading the president, Thein Sein, to halt construction of a
huge dam the Chinese were building. A weakened junta subse-

The Economist Apr il 22nd 2017 

S P E C I A L R E P O R T

A S I A N G E O P O L I T I C S

quently ceded much of its power to a democratically elected gov-
ernment. Chinese inﬂuence in the country has not recovered.
In Sri Lanka, from the mid-2000s China bet everything on
the then president, Mahinda Rajapaksa, and his family. But
murky Chinese loans and investments contributed to Mr Raja-
paksa’s unexpected failure to be re-elected in early 2015, which
came as a shock to China. In Malaysia, China recently helped
with a multi-billion-dollar bail-out of a heavily indebted state in-
vestment vehicle, 1MDB. That got the prime minister, Najib Ra-
zak, out of a pickle, but many Malaysians do not want to see their
country in hock to China, and Mr Najib’s troubles may not be
over yet.
Evelyn Goh of the Australian National University says Chi-
na has two blind spots in its dealings with smaller neighbours.
The ﬁrst is that it struggles to recognise what she calls their “au-
tonomous agency”, ascribing any behaviour it dislikes to malign
American inﬂuence. The second, more broadly, is its failure to un-
derstand that its aggressive behaviour, such as in the South Chi-
na Sea, undermines its development diplomacy. That disso-
nance between its growing power and its lagging status risks
adding to the sum of Chinese dissatisfactions. 7

Asian neighbours

When elephants ﬁght

Smaller Asian countr ies are adept at being ever yone’s
fr iend, but the job is getting harder

FOUR YEARS AGO, after Xi Jinping and Barack Obama had
embarked on a “new type of great-power relationship” at a
Californian ranch called Sunnylands, the world was soon specu-
lating about a new “G2” or a “Chimerica”; after all, the two lead-
ers’ economies were joined at the hip. Yet China’s Asian neigh-
bours felt uncomfortable. “When elephants mate,” says a
South-East Asian diplomat, “we ants get trampled.” “But when
elephants ﬁght,” an Australian strategist retorts, “the ants get
trampled even more.”
Outside China, every Asian country bar North Korea wel-
comes America’s presence in the region and wants it to remain.
Asians value American security, along with the clear rules un-
derpinning post-war prosperity that the security has allowed to
be upheld. Asians also value their economic relations with Chi-
na, but they fear that the alternative to an open American order is
a hierarchical Chinese one. Given China’s open ambitions, and
its closed authoritarian political system at home, it would be a
very diﬀerent world.
Countries in the region, a Singaporean ambassador ex-
plains, “don’t want to choose: it gives you more room to play.”
Preserving maximum sovereignty is an overarching goal for
most of them. But it is getting harder for them to hedge their bets.
Chinese counterparts, says the ambassador, insist that the Asian
bifurcation, of relying on America for security and China for
prosperity, should not be allowed to persist.
Japan, the region’s second-biggest power, is least troubled
by any need to choose: under its prime minister, Shinzo Abe, it
has thrown itself ﬁrmly into its alliance with America. That is
partly because of the growing threat to Japan posed by a nuclear,
warlike North Korea under Kim Jong Un. But Mr Abe has also
helped convince his people that both the economic and the secu-
rity threats from China are existential. In words and actions, Chi-

1

9

S P E C I A L R E P O R T

A S I A N G E O P O L I T I C S

400 km

C H I N A

TAIWAN

China/Taiwan
“nine-dash line”

Hanoi

MYAN-
MAR  

S o u t h
C h i n a
S e a

L A O S

Vientiane

V

I

Hainan
Island

E

Duncan I.

T

Danang

T H A I L A N D

Bangkok

C A M B O D I A

Woody I.
Paracel Is.
South-
west
Cay

Thitu I.
Subi Reef

N

A

M

Itu Aba I.
Gaven Reefs
Spratly Is.
Fiery Cross Reef
Cuarteron Reef

L A Y S

Swallow
Reef

A

M

Kuala
Lumpur

Natuna
Is.
SINGAPORE

I

A

Johnson
South Reef

BRUNEI

I

N

D

O

N

E

S

I

A

Exclusive economic
zone claims

That countr ies believe
they are entitled to
under UN Convention
on the Law of the Sea
Philippines
Vietnam
Malaysia
Brunei
Indonesia

P A C I F I C
O C E A N

PHILIPPINES

Scarborough
Shoal

Manila

Mischief Reef
Hughes Reef

Reclamation work by:
China
Taiwan
Philippines
Vietnam 
Malaysia
Airstr ips

Sources: amti.csis.org; janes.com;
lawfareblog.com

2

na has frequently been hostile towards his country (whose in-
complete acknowledgment of its second-world-war record has
not helped). Mr Abe’s political dominance in Japan owes much
to his willingness to articulate the China challenge. In his view,
this has to be countered with strong regional military, diplomatic
and economic alliances, led by America.
It was an immense disappointment to Mr Abe that almost
as soon as Mr Trump took oﬃce, he dumped the Trans-Paciﬁc
Partnership (TPP), a 12-country grouping including Australia, Ja-
pan, Malaysia, New Zealand, Singapore and Vietnam that had
over several years put together a “gold-standard” free-trade pact
for the Asia-Paciﬁc region. Mr Trump claimed that the deal sold
American businesses and workers down the river. Its partners
retort that America got everything it asked for in the negotia-
tions, such as longer patent protection for drugs and stronger in-
tellectual-property rights. All the painful adjustments that TPP
entailed were to be made by smaller members.
Given that Mr Trump was so willing to abandon the eco-
nomic dimension of America’s commitment to the region, Mr
Abe was acutely aware of the risk that he might dump the mili-
tary dimension too. After all, during the presidential campaign
Mr Trump had lambasted Japan and South Korea for supposedly
free-riding on America’s security commitment to them. Some
54,000 American servicemen and their families are stationed in
Japan and 28,500 in South Korea. Mr Trump had said both coun-
tries should do more for their own defence and contribute more
to the upkeep of American forces. He even threatened with-
drawal. He also suggested that Japan and South Korea could de-
velop their own nuclear weapons. Considering the implications
for those countries, and for the febrile region as a whole, it was an
astounding proposal. 
Mr Abe, in a nimble bit of diplomacy, made sure he was the
ﬁrst foreign leader to go to America to congratulate the president-
elect on his victory. Mr Trump visibly warmed to him, and later
invited him back to his Florida golf resort, Mar-a-Lago, for a week-
end of man-hugs and an unsettling 19-second power handshake.
Mr Abe is a nationalist with dreams of a Japan unshackled
from American tutelage, but right now he needs a strong alliance.
He pressed all the right buttons with Mr Trump, talking up the
potential for Japanese investment in America and pointing out
that his government is stretching the country’s paciﬁst constitu-

10

tion (which the Americans imposed after the second world war)
to allow more scope for Japan’s Self-Defence Forces to come to
the aid of allies. He also made clear that Japan already bears
much of America’s defence burden, paying for about 75% of the
American military presence in Japan—any more, a regional dip-
lomat jokes, and Japan would be shelling out for American sol-
diers’ wages, almost turning them into mercenaries. 
Mr Abe’s eﬀorts did not stop Mr Trump from pulling the
plug on the TPP, but Japanese oﬃcials are still pleased with their
recent diplomacy. Even North Korea’s test launch of a missile that
landed in the Sea of Japan while Mr Abe was in Florida worked
to his advantage: Mr Trump declared that Japan and America
were standing shoulder to shoulder. The Japanese diplomats
also came away with insights about how to tutor an American
president unfamiliar with Asian priorities. They say that he can
concentrate on only one thing at a time, and reckon that educat-
ing him will be an open-ended pursuit.

When luck runs out

The neighbour most troubled by Mr Trump’s presidency
may be Australia, a long-standing, staunch American ally. The
ﬁrst telephone call after the American election between the Aus-
tralian prime minister, Malcolm Turnbull, and Mr Trump (the
contents of which were leaked by someone in the White House)
was a disaster.
Australia had struck a deal with the previous American ad-
ministration under which America would resettle a small num-
ber of asylum-seekers currently in dismal camps in Nauru and
Papua New Guinea. But this was news to Mr Trump, who ac-
cused Australia of wanting to export the “next Boston bombers”
and told Mr Turnbull (himself no shrinking violet) that his was
“the worst call by far” of all the conversations he had had with
world leaders that day. He then hung up.
The incident has set Australian policymakers and strat-
egists talking about re-examining the relationship with America.
The two countries have had their disagreements before, says
James Curran, a historian at the University of Sydney, but they
have not been aired in public like this since Richard Nixon. When
that president got cross with Gough Whitlam, the independent-
minded Australian prime minister at the time, he put Australia
on his “shit list”. 
Policymakers reckon that Australia now faces the biggest
shift in its strategic position since the end of the second world
war. Its economy is heavily dependent on Chinese purchases of
iron ore and coal, but it has “subcontracted its entire strategic role
to Washington”, says Hugh White of the Australian National
University. Many strategists want Australia to be less slavish in its
relations with America, while praying that Mr Trump will prove
a more reliable partner.
Mr White goes further, arguing that Australia must prepare
for a China-led future. Yet that argument meets resistance at a
time when China appears increasingly bent on driving a wedge
between Australia and America. On a visit to Australia in March,
the prime minister, Li Keqiang, dangled the prospect of closer
economic ties, but also warned Australia against a “cold-war
mentality” and taking sides between China and America. 
Given Australia’s strategic position between the Indian and
Paciﬁc Oceans, the country’s strategists expect its waters to be in-
creasingly frequented, and even contested, by the Chinese navy.
The chief debate in foreign and defence policy now revolves
around not allowing China to push Australia around. But the
central paradox remains: to maintain a strong defence policy,
Australia needs a strong economy—and for that it needs strong
trade ties with its chief potential adversary.
South-East Asia’s people have lived close to big powers for 

The Economist Apr il 22nd 2017

1

2

centuries and learned to hedge their bets. In sum, such hedging
denies China an entirely free hand to act as it wishes. Japan’s
growing investment and diplomatic activities in South-East Asia,
for example, increase smaller countries’ options. Indeed, the bal-
ance of power in Asia is determined not just by the struggle for
primacy between America and China but also by the interplay
of lesser powers: Japan and South Korea in North-East Asia; and
Vietnam, Singapore, Indonesia and even India (increasingly
looking eastwards) in South-East Asia. But America still needs to
be part of the picture.
President Rodrigo Duterte of the Philippines on a state visit
to Beijing last October tried to mend relations damaged by a case
the Philippines had brought before an international tribunal at
The Hague, contesting China’s South China Sea claims. “I an-
nounce my separation from the United States,” he told his de-
lighted hosts. “America has lost now. I’ve realigned myself in
your ideological ﬂow.” Mr Duterte loudly called for American
troops to leave the Philippines and for joint military exercises to
end. China rewarded him with new markets and lavish dollops
of aid. Oddly, though, it turns out that the Philippines’ annual bi-
lateral drills with America are due to take place as usual this year.
There is even talk that Japan might join them.

China big, Vietnam small

Danang airport, a big American base during the Vietnam
war, mainly serves Chinese tourists these days. Many of them
are shuttled to the Crowne Plaza, a hulking hotel on the city’s
crescent-shaped beach ﬂanking the South China Sea. They like to
play blackjack in the casino, where the croupiers conduct their
games in Mandarin. 
About a quarter of Vietnam’s 10m or so visitors a year are
Chinese, more than any other nationality. Though locals in Da-
nang grumble about the rudeness of Chinese gamblers, “we wel-
come everyone,” says a Danang oﬃcial, with a stiﬀ smile. Many
Vietnamese regard China with wariness. Even the state-con-
trolled media run critical stories about Chinese investors buying
up large quantities of land near Danang. They also carry reports
of ﬁshermen from Danang and nearby central provinces being
detained by Chinese patrol vessels when they ﬁsh near disputed
reefs and islands in the South China Sea. The Vietnamese are still
indignant over China’s seizure in 1974 of the Paracel islands,
which contain the largest of the sea’s disputed islands and rocks.
Yet they are also well aware that China is their country’s
largest trading partner, as well as overwhelmingly more power-

Still hegemonic

Defence spending, selected countr ies
Per person, 2015, $

2003=100*

United States
United States 1,854
China
India
Singapore 1,705
Japan
Australia 982
South Korea
Australia
S. Korea 720
Taiwan
Taiwan 417
Singapore
Indonesia
Japan 323
Vietnam
China 156
Philippines

350

300

250

200

150

100

50

Vietnam 50

India 40

Philippines 38

Indonesia 30

Source: SIPRI

The Economist Apr il 22nd 2017 

2003

05

10

15

*Constant $ terms

S P E C I A L R E P O R T

A S I A N G E O P O L I T I C S

ful than little Vietnam. That became painfully evident in 2014
when, in a provocative gesture, a state-owned Chinese company
towed an oil-exploration rigs to a point south of the Paracels and
about 120 nautical miles (220km) from central Vietnam’s coast—
well within the country’s exclusive economic zone. Some Viet-
namese ﬁshing vessels steamed out to the rig in protest, only to
be rammed, and in one case sunk, by a far larger Chinese ﬂeet.
The incident sparked riots in industrial zones in Vietnam in
which protesters targeted foreign businesses and Chinese work-
ers. Several people died. When China issued a travel warning to
its citizens, tourism in Danang collapsed.
The Vietnamese respond to such vexations the way they
have always done: they strike compromises. Le Khai, who has
ﬁshed in the South China Sea for four decades, runs a gnarled ﬁn-
ger through the sand to make two circles of vastly diﬀerent sizes.
“China is very big, Vietnam very small,” he says. So he does not
take his ﬁshing boat too far into disputed waters, although he in-
sists that the Paracels are Vietnamese. Farther down the coastal
road, the owner of a souvenir shop says that nine-tenths of his
customers are Chinese tourists. For him, Vietnam’s maritime
claims are indisputable, but they do not pay the bills. 7

The r isk of conﬂict

Avoiding the trap

The best hope is a balance of restraint, force and
legitimacy

A MUCH-DISCUSSED recent study led by Graham Allison
of Harvard university highlighted the dangers looming
when a rising power challenges a ruling one, as when Athens
challenged Sparta in ancient Greece. A rising power gains a
growing sense of its entitlement and importance, often fed by
past grievances and slights. This makes the established power
feel insecure and all the more determined to defend the status
quo. “When a rising power is threatening to displace a ruling
power,” Mr Allison writes, “standard crises that would other-
wise be contained, like the assassination of an archduke in 1914,
can initiate a cascade of reactions that, in turn, produce out-
comes none of the parties would otherwise have chosen.” This
is the Thucydides Trap, named after the Athenian historian who
ﬁrst pointed to it. The Harvard study concluded that in 12 out of
the 16 historical cases in the past 500 years that it examined, the
outcome was war. 
It may be a consolation that both Xi Jinping and Shinzo Abe
have mentioned the Thucydides Trap as a cautionary comment
on Chinese-American rivalry. But the leader of the status-quo
power in Asia, Donald Trump, almost boasts about his ignorance
of history. Besides, even when the protagonists are forewarned,
there is still great scope for getting it wrong. It is a feature of the
trap that defensive behaviour by one party—such as China’s
building airstrips and the like on reefs in the South China Sea—is
seen as aggression by the other.
In the Harvard study, when war was avoided it was thanks
only to “huge, painful adjustments in attitudes and actions on
the part not just of the challenger but also the challenged”. At the
heart of this must be eﬀorts to establish durable patterns of co-
operation. For America and China, two areas are likely to be key:
trade and North Korea. 
Trade and the problems of access to China’s vast market

1

11

S P E C I A L R E P O R T

A S I A N G E O P O L I T I C S

North Korean rocket science

2 cause the West understandable frustration. Two decades ago for-
eign businesses were cheerleaders for China to become part of
the world economy (it eventually joined the World Trade Organi-
sation in 2001). Today the mood among foreign businesses in
China has turned to disenchantment. 
Tariﬀs on China’s imports of goods are low, but in an econ-
omy dominated by state giants, outsiders are shut out of too
many sectors, including government procurement. In industries
which the Chinese government considers sensitive, the obsta-
cles are written or unwritten rules. In other areas, such as cloud
computing, Western companies fear to tread, because they are
worried about the safety of proprietary technology or data. Chi-
na’s latest initiative, “Made in China 2025”, is a blueprint for cre-
ating national champions in advanced manufacturing, promis-
ing government subsidies and investment in ten “strategic”
industries. Other countries have similar plans. The diﬀerence is
that foreign companies are not so shut out of them.
These are legitimate grievances, but the best hope of deal-
ing with them is for America to pursue them vigorously within
the multilateral system. If the United States were to go outside
the framework of the WTO, or even shut access to its own mar-
kets, it would risk immense harm both to the bilateral relation-
ship and to the global trading order.
North Korea raises even bigger challenges. The pace of its
missile and nuclear development appears to be quickening. Last
year Kim Jong Un’s regime launched a missile from a submarine,
a ﬁrst. In early March it test-ﬁred a cluster of rockets in prepara-
tion, it said, for attacking American bases in Japan. Later that
month, in another ﬁrst, it con-
ducted a comprehensive test of
a ﬁrst-stage rocket for an inter-
continental ballistic missile. A
sixth nuclear test is thought to
be in the works. 
China, 
like America,
wants North Korea to abandon
its nuclear programme. At the
UN it has signed up to an Ameri-
can-led 
sanctions
regime
against the North. It has a tan-
gled history with its small,
snarling neighbour. Oﬃcially
the two countries are still allies,
but China is furious about the
North’s truculence. Still, it dis-
plays an astonishing inability to
see things from anyone else’s

Exports, $bn 
FDI stock, 
$bn
Foreign 
residents, ’000
University 
students, ’000
Visitor 
arrivals, m

Sources: Census
Bureau; Rhodium
Group; IEE; NBS; NTTO

*As reported by China
†As reported by US
‡Foreign-born

Deeply engaged

China US to
to US China

382.5  
*
115.8
109.4  240.9

Selected compar isons, 2016 or latest

China and United States

304  

2.6  

2,148  

‡

71.5

†

22

2.1

12

Corporate offer

Offer to readers  

Repr ints of this special repor t are available. 
A minimum order of f ive copies is required.
Please contact: Jill Kaletha at Foster 
Pr inting Tel: +1 866 879 9144  Ext: 168 
e-mail: jillk@fosterpr inting.com

Corporate orders of 100 copies or more are 
available. We also of fer a customisation 
ser vice. Please contact us to discuss your 
requirements.
Tel: +44 (0)20 7576 8148
e-mail: r ights@economist.com
For more information on how to order special 
repor ts, repr ints or any copyr ight quer ies 
you may have, please contact:
The Rights and Syndication Depar tment
20 Cabot Square
London E14 4QW
Tel: +44 (0)20 7576 8148
Fax: +44 (0)20 7576 8492
e-mail:   r ights@economist.com
www.economist.com/r ights

point of view. In particular, it has
thundered against South Korea’s
plans to install an American
anti-missile system, Terminal
High Altitude Area Defence
(THAAD), designed to shoot
down attacking North Korean
missiles, claiming that the sys-
tem’s radar will allow America
to look deep into its own de-
fences. It has organised consum-
er boycotts of South Korean
goods and entertainment
to
punish its neighbour. That sends
an unnerving message to the re-
gion: that its relatively petty is-
sues trump real concerns over
the North Korean threat. 
A better approach would
be to share concerns over North
Korea and work together on con-
tingency plans. That requires
wisdom and patience. The same
goes for the broader relation-
ship between China and Ameri-
ca, which in Henry Kissinger’s
words requires “a subtle bal-
ance of restraint, force and legiti-
macy”. A balance of power de-
ﬁned primarily in military terms
will, he insists, “shade into con-
frontation”. If the Thucydides
Trap is to be avoided, the search for partnership has to begin. The
meeting between Mr Trump and Mr Xi at Mar-a-Lago earlier this
month was a start. But it will come to nothing unless co-opera-
tion is put at the heart of relations between the two countries. 

Future special reports
International banking May 6th 

Previous special repor ts and a list of 
for thcoming ones can be found online: 

economist.com/specialreports

Trump’s Amer ica July 1st 

Israel May 20th

Something to build on

A rich basis for such co-operation is already in place (see
chart), and perhaps widely underappreciated. Almost half of all
foreign buyers of American property are Chinese, as are one-
third of the nearly 1m foreign students in America. China can
trace one-third of its GDP to foreign investment, much of it Amer-
ican. And Starbucks opens a new branch in China every 15 hours.
A large part of the world wants America’s president both to un-
derstand and care about such things.
Yet China’s likely trajectory in the coming years will make
co-operation harder, not easier. Mr Xi’s rule is proving more au-
thoritarian than that of his predecessors, resources continue to
be poured into military spending, and a slowdown in China’s
debt-fuelled economy may render politics more brittle and make
an ugly jingoism a tempting diversion. 
Many Americans will question why their country should
cede ground. It would certainly be wrong to retreat in the face of
threats of force. In other areas, however, if China seems willing to
shoulder responsibilities, America should respond. For instance,
rather than allow China to nurture resentment at being shut out
of running Western-led institutions such as the IMF and the
World Bank, why not oﬀer to incorporate China’s new Asian In-
frastructure Investment Bank into the global institutional order?
That is where the wisdom comes in. China must show it
too, by acknowledging that Asia wants the American presence to
continue, and that its own security and prosperity also depend
on it. Above all, both America and China need to remember that
the alternative to co-operation is confrontation. 7

The Economist Apr il 22nd 2017

 
 
Europe

The Economist Apr il 22nd 2017 41

Also in this section
42 Protests in French Guiana
42 Lousy jobs in southern Europe 
43 Ir ish wind power
44 Charlemagne: Martin Schulz’s
political hero

Turkey’s constitutional referendum

Erdogan the maleﬁcent

I S T A N B U L

The president gets his long-cherished constitution amid allegations of vote-rigging
IT WAS a vote that turned out to be as con-
controversy. The main opposition, the sec-
troversial as it was hotly contested. Even
ular Republican People’s party (CHP), has
before all of the ballots had been counted,
asked for the referendum results to be an-
Recep Tayyip Erdogan, Turkey’s president,
nulled. A last-minute decision by the coun-
stepped in front of a crowd of supporters in
try’s electoral board to accept unstamped
Istanbul and proclaimed victory. “My na-
ballot papers created the risk of mass fraud,
tion stood upright and undivided,” he said,
the CHP said. Claims of vote-rigging, espe-
referring to the referendum on a constitu-
cially in the Kurdish southeast, have been
tion that will give him new, virtually un-
pouring in. In a scathing assessment, ob-
checked powers. “April 16th was a victory
servers from the Organisation for Security
for all of Turkey.” 
and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE), an in-
Yet it was hardly the win Mr Erdogan
tergovernmental body, said the board’s
had expected. The Yes camp, which the
move had “undermined an important
president headed, limped away with just
safeguard and contradicted the law”. A
51.4% of the vote. The opposition accused
state of emergency imposed shortly after
the country’s electoral authority of foul
an attempted coup in July, accompanied
play. Outside observers charged the gov-
by nearly 50,000 arrests and a climate of
ernment with stacking the odds in its fa-
intimidation and nationalist hysteria, was
vour. Anti-government demonstrations
hardly the proper setting for a referendum
broke out in a number of Turkish cities. The
on systemic changes. “Voters were not pro-
country awoke the following morning
vided with impartial information about
more divided than ever. 
key aspects of the reform and limitations
The new constitution will bring about
on fundamental freedoms had a negative
the most radical overhaul of the state since
eﬀect,” the OSCE said.
1923, when it went from being an imperial
There is next to no chance of a recount.
Islamic power to a secular republic under
The electoral board rejected the opposi-
Kemal Ataturk, the founder of modern Tur-
tion’s appeal on April 19th, but promised to
key. After fresh elections in 2019, Mr Erdo-
look into individual allegations of fraud.
gan will rule uncontested, appointing se-
(Oﬃcial results are expected towards the
nior oﬃcials, judges and members of his
end of April.) Mr Erdogan asked foreign ob-
own cabinet, with little oversight by an ex-
servers to keep their concerns to them-
panded but weakened parliament. The of-
selves. “We don’t care about the opinions
ﬁce of prime minister will cease to exist. 
of ‘Hans’ or ‘George’,” he said. His prime
Yet the constitution is already mired in
minister added: “The people’s decision is

For daily analysis and debate on Europe, visit
Economist.com/europe

clear and the result is a Yes.”
The allegations will haunt Mr Erdogan
for years, leaving the country even more
polarised than before. Mr Erdogan might
be “the most unassailable Turkish leader
since Ataturk but this legitimacy issue will
hang over his head,” says Soner Cagaptay,
a fellow at the Washington Institute.
International reaction has been muted.
Other than Donald Trump’s America,
which joined model democracies such as
Russia, Sudan, Hungary and Djibouti in
congratulating Mr Erdogan, no leader of a
big Western country has welcomed the
vote. Britain, Germany and the EU called
instead for dialogue and an impartial in-
quiry. Mr Erdogan did not appear particu-
larly keen to rebuild bridges with Europe:
on the day of the vote, he pledged once
again to do his part to reinstate the death
penalty, which would threaten the mem-
bership of Turkey in the Council of Europe
and torpedo its already comatose acces-
sion talks with the EU.

One-man show
Supporters of the new constitution say it
will improve decision-making by concen-
trating power in Mr Erdogan’s hands, pre-
cluding unwieldy political coalitions and
neutralising powerful unelected oﬃcials.
“From now on, it’s the people who are go-
ing to rule Turkey,” says Ufuk, a young Yes
voter relaxing outside a polling booth. 
Opponents say it will transform the
government, already dominated by Mr Er-
dogan, into an authoritarian regime. “This
is the beginning of one-man rule,” says Ali
Bayramoglu, a columnist who used to be
sympathetic to the ruling Justice and De-
velopment (AK) party. After he said earlier
this month that he would oppose the new
constitution, Mr Bayramoglu was assault-
ed by AK supporters at a polling station on 

1

42 Europe

2 the day of the vote. 
Some of the changes will come into ef-
fect immediately. An impartiality clause
that required the president to sever links
with any political party (which he ﬂouted)
will expire. Mr Erdogan is expected formal-
ly to rejoin AK as soon as oﬃcial results are
announced this week. Within a month, the
country’s most inﬂuential judicial body,
the council of judges and prosecutors, will
shrink and move from a system of election
by peers to one of appointment by parlia-
ment and the president. 
Mr Erdogan’s initial comments suggest
he will disregard the slim margin of victory
and portray the referendum as a sign of
support for his crackdown. The day after
the vote, his government extended the
state of emergency until July 19th. Two
days after that, police arrested some 38
people accused of participating in protests. 
Turkey is saddled with a constitution
opposed by nearly half of all voters in a ref-
erendum tainted by fraud claims and held
under conditions that made open debate
impossible. Mr Erdogan has the powers he
has long coveted. They come at the cost of
tension at home and isolation abroad. 7

Protests in French Guiana

Failure to launch

C A Y E N N E , F R E N C H G U I A N A

The second-poorest department in
France demands more autonomy
OF ALL the voters fuming about neglect
by out-of-touch politicians in distant
Paris, the people of French Guiana have
perhaps the strongest case. It is the second-
poorest of France’s ﬁve overseas depart-
ments (DOMs). The unemployment rate, at
over 20%, is more than double that of the
mainland. Some 40% live in poverty. The
murder rate is the highest in France. 
The department is entering its ﬁfth
week of a general strike. Thousands of Gui-
anese have taken to the streets to protest
against high living costs, lack of jobs and
crime. The demonstrations started on
March 20th, when workers from Endel-En-
gie, an engineering ﬁrm, and EDF, the local
energy utility, blocked roads outside the
coastal city of Kourou to prevent
the
launch of a rocket from the Guiana Space
Centre, which is based near the city.
The space centre is the main launching
pad for the European Space Agency, owing
to Guinea’s location close to the equator
(to take advantage of the earth’s spin) and
by an ocean (to reduce the chances that a
botched launch will rain debris on peo-
ple’s heads). It is also a symbol of the main-
land’s apathy: a few miles down the road
from Kourou “some people still have no

running water or electricity,” says Antoine
Louis-Alexandre, a protester. 
Guiana’s troubles are not new. A former
slave and penal colony, it was designated
as an overseas department in 1946, giving it
the same political status as mainland de-
partments. But inequalities have persisted
between the DOMs and mainland France.
Guiana is rich in natural resources, in-
cluding gold, oﬀshore oil and France’s larg-
est forest. But its economy is moribund. It is
dependent on imports from mainland
France and Europe. In 2015 it exported
€138.6m ($148.4m) worth of goods, com-
pared with €1.2bn of imports. Even wood
is imported, despite a lush rainforest in its
back yard, which is a protected green zone
that allows France to oﬀset its carbon emis-
sions. A high import tax on anything that
arrives by sea means Guianese people pay
higher prices. Food products are 45% more
expensive than on the mainland. 
The department’s infrastructure is ap-
palling. Two main roads connect the prin-
cipal towns along the coast but in the inte-
rior people travel by canoe. Its schools are
in crisis, with dilapidated buildings and
over-sized classes. One in two Guianese
leave school with no diploma.
Moreover, its population has tripled
since 1985. Partly this is to do with migra-
tion. Guiana is better oﬀ than its South
American neighbours. Unguarded Ama-
zonian borders led to a surge of newcom-
ers from Brazil and Suriname in the 1980s
and 1990s. The birth rate has also soared.
Today, 43% of the population is under 20.
Almost half of those under 25 have no jobs.
Its status as part of the European Union
also makes it a convenient transit zone for
traﬃckers moving cocaine from South
America into Europe. The number of Guia-
nese caught with drugs in Cayenne’s air-
port doubled between 2014 and 2016, to
371. Crime rates are correspondingly high. 
The government in Paris has taken note,

Not quite Le Marais

The Economist Apr il 22nd 2017

oﬀering €1bn in emergency funds to pay
for policing and improvements to hospi-
tals and schools. Protest leaders demanded
a further €2.1bn. They also want immunity
for those involved in road blockades. But
most of all they want change: “The DOMs
need greater autonomy and a system that
is adapted to local conditions,” says Gabri-
el Serville, one of Guiana’s deputies. Oth-
erwise, protesters are clear: standing in
front of a crowd in Cayenne and pointing
at the French ﬂag this month, one declared,
“If they can’t treat us like French citizens,
like they treat French citizens elsewhere,
we’ll tear it down.” 7

McJobs

The tempest

A T H E N S , M A D R I D A N D N A P L E S

Segmented labour markets have
scarred southern Europe
EMA ZELIKOVITCH, a 24-year-old philos-
ophy graduate in Madrid, takes a deep
breath before listing the jobs she has held
over the past few years. While at university
she worked as a dance teacher, waitress,
street fund-raiser for NGOs, call-centre op-
erator and greeter at political conferences
for Podemos, a far-left party. Since graduat-
ing she has juggled jobs at two restaurants,
but one recently sacked her. Every job was
on a temporary, or “ﬁxed-term”, contract.
And while some paid her a living wage,
none came with a path to promotion.
Dead-end, ﬁxed-term jobs have haunt-
ed southern Europe for decades. In 2015
over half of employed 15-to-29 year olds in
Spain were on temporary contracts, com-
pared to two-ﬁfths in Italy and just under a
quarter in Greece; the average across the
European Union is 14% (see chart 1).
More ﬂexible northern countries tend
to protect the worker rather than the job,
allowing their economies to adjust more
quickly to shocks and 
technological
change. In the south, half-baked attempts
at labour reforms contributed to the pro-
blem: governments made it easier to hire
and ﬁre new workers, but were wary of
touching highly protected “insiders”. This
created a two-tier labour market, with the
lower tier populated by a young precariat.
Such segmentation means that
the
most vulnerable workers before the crisis
were hit hardest during it. In Spain, as the
crash hit the construction sector, tempo-
rary contracts as a share of the total fell,
from 32% in 2007 to 25% in 2009. Those
with the fewest employment rights were
the ﬁrst to go.
Now, while unemployment in the euro
zone is edging downwards, southern Euro-
pean labour markets are lopsided. Youth 

1

The Economist Apr il 22nd 2017 

Tempered expectation

Employed 15- to 29-year-olds, selected 
EU countr ies, % on temporar y contracts 

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

C O N N E M A R A

1

Energy in Ireland

Bog down, wind up

Europe 43

2015

Spain
Poland
Por tugal
Italy
France
Germany
EU-28 average

Greece
Ireland
Denmark
Br itain

Source: Eurostat

2

unemployment is still painfully high, at
35% in Italy, and over 40% in Spain and
Greece. And employers seem no more
keen to make permanent hires. In Spain, It-
aly and Greece, the share of employees on
temporary contracts between the ages of 15
and 29 rose by at least three percentage
points between 2012 and 2015.
These economies’ inability to increase
the number of permanent contracts has
stored up problems. The churn of tempo-
rary workers crimps productivity growth.
In Spain, the cost of making an employee
permanent is so large that ﬁrms “rotate
people instead”, says Marcel Jansen of the
Autonomous University of Madrid. A
quarter of temporary contracts in Spain
last for one month or less. Employers have
little incentive to train up a worker they
think will leave soon anyway. And such
short spells hardly give workers time to de-
velop skills on the job.
Faced with the lower wages that tend to
accompany temporary work, many young
people turn to the black market, either
working cash-in-hand or not declaring
freelance work commissioned by ﬁrms
abroad. In Naples, 30-year-old Giuseppe is
oﬃcially unemployed but occasionally
works for cash in a factory. He dreams of
going abroad, perhaps to England; cur-
rently he lives at home with his mother.

Tempers are r ising

Employed 15- to 29-year-olds, southern Europe
% on temporar y contracts

2

Spain

Italy

Greece

2002 04

06

08

10

12

14 15

Source: Eurostat

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

must be carefully tuned to keep it stable.
One way around this is to export excess
power that takes the grid beyond the
point of stability. This is the trick used by
Denmark, amongst others, whose grid is
linked to those of Germany, Sweden and
Norway. 
Ireland already has two connections
to Britain. At night, these cables provide
hundreds of megawatts of Irish wind
power to its neighbour. Eirgrid is plan-
ning a cable to continental Europe. A
report from SEAI, Ireland’s energy au-
thority, suggests that the island could
generate enough wind electricity to
match domestic demand by 2030, with
more left over to export. That would be
good timing. Bord na Móna, the body
responsible for developing Ireland’s
peatlands, has said it will stop extracting
peat for electricity by the same year.

Ireland is ditching peat for energy from wind
P EAT has a lot to recommend it. It im-
parts a delicious ﬂavour to whiskey. It
emits an agreeable aroma when burned.
It is a cheap source of energy; at its sim-
plest it involves no more than digging by
hand. Ireland, which has bogs full of the
stuﬀ, uses it for 6% of its energy. 
But peat is also one of the dirtiest fuels
available, emitting 23% more carbon
dioxide than coal. Ireland is unusual
among developed countries in burning it
for energy on an industrial scale. A geo-
logical precursor to coal, it has been used
on the island for at least 1,000 years. But it
may at last be on its way out as Ireland
turns to another energy source of which
it has unlimited quantities: wind. 
Galway Wind Park, in the remote,
soggy hills of Connemara facing the
Atlantic Ocean, will be Ireland’s largest
wind farm when it is completed this
summer, generating 169MW of power at
peak capacity, or about 3% of Ireland’s
average needs. Some turbines are already
generating electricity. It is only the latest
development in Irish wind power, which
has tripled in the last decade to more
than 3GW of capacity. The renewable
resource now provides a quarter of the
electricity Ireland consumes every year.
Eirgrid, a state-owned company which
manages the grid in both Northern Ire-
land and the Republic, says much more
wind capacity is in the planning stages.
Wind is diﬃcult to manage because it
is unpredictable, even on the blustery
shores of western Ireland. Since wind
turbines do not turn consistently, the grid

Air above, Éire below

Others are doing more than dreaming:
between 350,000 and 420,000 Greeks
have left the country since 2008, from new-
ly qualiﬁed doctors to hairdressers. “We’ve
gone back to the 1950s when my grandpar-
ents left to work in a German factory,” says
Aristotelis, a 28-year-old Greek doctor who
is planning to move to Hamburg to be-
come a surgeon. In the southern Spanish
region of Andalusia, where unemploy-
ment rates are among the highest in Europe
at 30%, many young people wish they
could stay. “It’s a really good place to live,
with nice people and close to the sea,” says
Miguel, a 19-year-old studying business
management. But he sees no future in
Spain. 
To their credit, policymakers have been
trying to tug the tiers of employment to-
gether. In 2012 Spain introduced a labour
reform which, along with introducing
more wage ﬂexibility, cut severance pay-

ments for permanent employees and in-
troduced subsidies for companies hiring
new full-time workers. In Greece attempts
have been made since 2010 to loosen col-
lective-bargaining agreements. In Italy,
after much wrangling, the former prime
minister, Matteo Renzi, passed a “Jobs Act”
in 2014 which attempts to increase the
number of permanent workers with tem-
porary tax breaks while also making it eas-
ier to ﬁre full-time workers.
So far, the reforms have not altered the
trend 
towards
temporary
contracts,
though caution by employers amid a weak
recovery makes this unsurprising. 
Many politicians lack ambition to go
further. In Spain only one party—Ciudada-
nos (Citizens), a new liberal party—is push-
ing for further labour reform to reduce the
number of temporary contracts. Without
more progress, the young will vote with
their feet. 7

44 Europe

The Economist Apr il 22nd 2017

Charlemagne

In the shadow of Willy Brandt

Martin Schulz wants to emulate his political hero. He faces an uphill struggle

giously and encourages comparisons.
There are indeed similarities. Like Brandt in 1969, Mr Schulz
leads an SPD that is tired of being the junior partner in a grand co-
alition, yet struggling, at a time of economic boom, to usurp a
long-dominant CDU/CSU. Like Brandt, a one-time mayor of iso-
lated West Berlin, the former European Parliament president is an
outsider in German federal politics. And like Brandt he is blunt,
approachable, emotional, idealistically European in outlook and
palpably hungry for power.
Their political strategies are alike, too. Brandt’s campaign was
hyper-personal, known as the “Willy Election”; Mr Schulz orates
under banners proclaiming “Time for Martin” and in front of
crowds chanting his ﬁrst name. By focusing on things like schools
(saying that he will oﬀer voters “fee-free education from nursery
to university”) he wants to emulate his idol’s path to power: an al-
liance spanning the working-class SPD, the liberal Free Democrat-
ic Party (FDP) and the intellectual left (in Brandt’s day the peace
movement, today the Green Party). In 1969 the laboratory of this
coalition was the new SPD-FDP government in the state of North
Rhine-Westphalia. Today the equivalent is the SPD-FDP-Green co-
alition in Rhineland-Palatinate, which has already introduced
fee-free education. 
So far, so Schulz-Eﬀekt. But his problems have to do with the
diﬀerences between then and now. Brandt had the beneﬁt of
three years as vice-chancellor in the lead-up to 1969. Mr Schulz, by
contrast, is unfamiliar with Germany, having been away since
1994. He is frantically swotting. A recent interview in which he
claimed 40%, not the correct 14%, of young Germans are on short-
term contracts cost him credibility. Meanwhile, where Brandt’s
time in Berlin berating the communist East burnished his reputa-
tion, Mr Schulz’s support for euro-zone debt-sharing is a political
liability. Jens Spahn, a rising CDU/CSU star, brands him a better
friend to Greek communists than to German taxpayers.

2017 is not 1969
The biggest diﬀerence has to do with coalitions. In Brandt’s day
there were just four parties in the Bundestag. He became chancel-
lor by forming an SPD-FDP coalition, condemning the larger
CDU/CSU to opposition. In the next Bundestag there will proba-
bly be seven parties, complicating the arithmetic. Mr Schulz
could seek another grand coalition with Mrs Merkel’s centre-right
CDU/CSU. But his party has long suﬀered in this arrangement.
Promoting yet another alliance between the two would thus
only help Mrs Merkel. So Mr Schulz is going for a coalition with
the FDP and the Greens. But his putative liberal partners are not
keen and polls put this grouping well short of a majority. 
That leaves a coalition with the Greens and the socialist Die
Linke (the Left), which descends from the Communist party that
ran East Germany. Unlike previous SPD candidates for chancellor,
Mr Schulz refuses to rule out such a coalition. But Die Linke’s anti-
NATO views make it politically toxic. Talk of an SPD-Left govern-
ment in Saarland, for example, appears to have raised turnout
among CDU/CSU voters and contributed to the SPD’s defeat.
There is a historical irony here. Brandt dreamed of reuniﬁca-
tion and as chancellor warmed relations with East Germany. In
the long term his vision came true. But this ultimately created a
force in Die Linke that now hoovers up social-democratic votes in
the east, is electorally toxic in the west, and without which the
SPD may not be able to build a left-of-centre coalition. The legacy
of his hero weighs heavily on Mr Schulz. 7

WHEN Martin Schulz entered the village hall in Nunkirchen
on March 24th, in the hilly German state of Saarland, the
cheer nearly blew the roof oﬀ. To a beery crowd of villagers and
party activists, the candidate for Germany’s centre-left Social
Democrats (SPD), who hopes to replace Angela Merkel as chan-
cellor, was introduced as a near-messiah: “the man who made
politics in Germany interesting again, who has reinstated the
SPD’s self-belief, who has put social justice back on the agenda,
who will be our next chancellor!” As he ascended the stage a
hush fell. The bells of the church next door began to peal: “I didn’t
ask for that!”, he insisted.
His speech quickly transcended the borders of Saarland,
which was about to elect a new government. Mr Schulz ruminat-
ed on Europe; cracked folksy jokes; solemnly intoned about Ger-
many’s historical burden; cast his family, neighbours and ac-
quaintances from the campaign trail as characters in a
compendium of parables about the country. He lingered on Willy
Brandt, the SPD chancellor of West Germany from 1969 to 1974,
who had once spoken in the very same hall. In reverential tones
Mr Schulz recalled his 20-year-old self receiving a book as a prize
from the great man. “I still have that book,” he said, eyes a-glisten.
This was the peak of what Germans call the Schulz-Eﬀekt. It
started on January 24th, when Sigmar Gabriel, then-leader of the
SPD, unexpectedly handed the reins to his charismatic comrade,
the outgoing president of the European Parliament. The new face
worked wonders. Having long languished in the polls, the SPD
suddenly shot up by ten points. It drew level with Mrs Merkel’s
centre-right alliance of the Christian Democratic Union (CDU)
and its Bavarian sister party, the Christian Social Union (CSU),
with which the SPD rules in coalition. Euphoria gripped the party.
Then, two days after Mr Schulz’s speech, the SPD returned a medi-
ocre result in the Saarland election. It has since fallen back in na-
tional polls; Mrs Merkel is once again the most popular prospec-
tive chancellor. Can the Schulz-Eﬀekt be revived?
In trying to answer that question, it helps to contemplate the
man Mr Schulz calls his “idol”. A half-metre-high bronze statue of
Brandt stands in his oﬃce. He has described the 1972 election, the
ﬁrst in which the SPD won more seats than the CDU/CSU alli-
ance, as “the moment of my politicisation”. He quotes Brandt reli-

Br itain

A snap election

Back into battle

suﬀering from the inevitable disappoint-
ments of having to run a country. On April
19th the Times quoted polling data suggest-
ing that Mrs May could win the election
with a majority of more than 100 seats.
That would enhance her freedom to ne-
gotiate Brexit. Her current working major-
ity of 17 gives leverage to hardline Brexi-
teers who might vote against any deal that
involved sacriﬁcing control over migration
or paying an exit fee to leave Europe. A big-
ger majority would give her the freedom to
compromise with the European Union
and get the deal through Parliament.
It would enhance her authority in other
ways, too. It would give her a personal
mandate while releasing her from the stric-
tures of David Cameron’s 2015 manifesto,

Theresa May astonished everybody, including her own cabinet, by calling for a
snap general election on June 8th
ONE thing is certain about the British
general election: Theresa May didn’t
call it for the reason she claimed. Standing
in front of 10 Downing Street on April 18th
the prime minister said she had no choice
but to call a poll because “the country is
coming together but Westminster is not”.
In fact, the country remains deeply divid-
ed—more than 40% of Britons still think
that Brexit was a mistake—whereas the big-
gest opposition party, Labour, has sided
with Mrs May in accepting “the will of the
people” as expressed in the referendum.
The reason she called the election is
simple: she thinks she can win big. Jeremy
Corbyn, who combines ideological ex-
tremism with political incompetence, has
led Labour to a near-record slump in popu-
larity. The party is deeply divided between
its pro-Brexit working-class heartlands and
its anti-Brexit metropolitan annexe. The
Conservatives have maintained close to a
20-point lead in opinion polls over Labour
for months. Only 14% of Britons say they
would choose Mr Corbyn as prime minis-
ter over Mrs May. The Tories’ lead among
working class “C2DE” voters is almost as
great as among rich ABC1s (see chart).
The Liberal Democrats have a strong
message—we’re the party of the 48% who
voted to Remain—but a weak leader in Tim
Farron. The UK Independence Party has
imploded. And the Scottish Nationalists
have peaked, winning 56 of Scotland’s 59
constituencies in the last election and now

Br itain, voting intention by social class, %

Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec

Jan Feb Mar Apr

50

45

40

35

30

25

20

2016

Source: YouGov

Conservative

ABC1

C2DE

C2DE

2017

Common touch

ABC1

Labour

The Economist Apr il 22nd 2017 45

Also in this section
46 The Tor y class of 2017
46 The Lib Dems’ Brexit bounce
47 Labour braces itself
48 Bagehot: Theresa May, Tor y of Tor ies

For daily analysis and debate on Br itain, visit
Economist.com/br itain

which has already caused her to retract a
proposed tax increase. And the new gener-
ation of Tory MPs will have fought the elec-
tion with Mrs May as the commander-in-
chief and will see their futures in terms of
keeping her happy (see box).
Just as important, victory would extend
her time in Downing Street until 2022. The
Tory high command had been increasingly
worried about the fact that the Fixed-term
Parliaments Act would force her to call an
election in 2020. This might have given the
EU a negotiating lever: Mrs May would
have had to rush to reach a deal before the
British election cycle started. It would also
have reduced the amount of time she had
to sell her Brexit deal to the country. Now
she may have three years between produc-
ing a deal and facing voters.
Why did such an obvious decision take
Britain by surprise? Cabinet members
were reported to be “stunned” when they
learned of her opinion a few minutes be-
fore she informed the country. The ques-
tion had been debated for months in Tory
circles. In March William Hague, a former
party leader, launched a trial balloon in a
newspaper article calling for an early elec-
tion. Enthusiasm halted when a poll by Sir
Lynton Crosby, the Tories’ election guru,
showed the party losing seats in the south
to the Lib Dems.
There are, in fact, several reasons
against calling an election. The obvious
one is that Mrs May repeatedly said that
she wouldn’t. The second is that waiting
until 2020 would bring some big advan-
tages: the chance to keep Mr Corbyn in of-
ﬁce longer and the likelihood of bagging 20
more seats following boundary changes.
The Tories worried about overriding
the Fixed-term Parliaments Act, which re-
quires a two-thirds majority of MPs. A wily
Labour leader might have forced them to
pass a vote of no conﬁdence in their own

1

46 Br itain

2 government in order to hold a general elec-
tion; Mr Corbyn simply went along with
her. They also worried about election fa-
tigue. A country that is used to voting every
ﬁve years will, by June 8th, have gone to
the polls three times in two years.
All elections are risky. The press will
want drama; the Lib Dems might provide it
by picking up seats in Remain territory
such as London and the south-west (see
next story). John Curtice of Strathclyde
University warns that Mrs May’s hopes of
a three-ﬁgure majority will melt if her lead
is cut from 20 points to ten or below. In 2015
a seven-point lead over Labour translated
to a majority of only 12. He adds that many
Labour MPs have very large majorities.
Yet the Tories look like hounds baying
for blood and the Labour Party like fright-
ened foxes. Half a dozen Labour MPs have
already declared that they won’t ﬁght the
election and more are disassociating them-
selves from their leader.
The Conservatives will present
the
election as a chance and a choice. It will be
a chance to give Mrs May the authority to
negotiate in Brussels (she will talk a great

deal about the need for this authority and
very little about what her negotiating posi-
tion will be). And it will be a choice be-
tween Mrs May and Mr Corbyn. Hitherto
the Tories have been soft on Labour’s
leader because they regard him as an asset.
Over the next seven weeks they will un-
load ﬁling cabinets full of documents
about his friendly relations with the IRA,
Hamas, Hugo Chávez and others who are
not well thought of in middle England. The
pro-Brexit press is egging them on: “Crush
the saboteurs”, urged the Daily Mail’s front
page after Mrs May called the election. 
Yet her gamble makes a softer Brexit
more likely. The pound surged to a sixth-
month high on news of the election. Mrs
May will talk a great deal over the coming
weeks about needing the authority to ne-
gotiate with the EU. She is just as interested
in getting the clout to negotiate with the
30-40 hardliners in her party who have
used a succession of slim Tory majorities
to exercise undue and malign inﬂuence on
British politics. The saboteurs who end up
being crushed might not be the ones that
the Daily Mail is thinking of. 7

The class of 2017

One of us?

The new generation of Tory MPs will not cause the prime minister much grief
WITH the Conservatives far ahead in
the polls, Theresa May’s parliamen-
tary party is likely to swell after the elec-
tion. As well as winning seats from La-
bour, the Tories will need to replace a
handful of their own MPs who are step-
ping down, such as George Osborne, a
former chancellor. If the polls pan out,
around 100 new Conservative MPs might
soon be taking the oath of allegiance to
the Crown.
Mrs May hopes that this will provide
her with a cushion of moderate MPs to
dilute the inﬂuence of the three-dozen or
so ultra-Brexiteers on her backbenches,
making it easier for her to compromise in
the Brexit negotiations. But will the new
MPs be hard or soft Brexiteers?
It is partly a question of which seats
are up for grabs. In the 100 constituencies
where the Conservatives need the small-
est swing in order to win, support for
Brexit is similar to that in the country as a
whole. Around a third of them delivered
majorities for Remain. That calls for Tory
candidates who are not too hardline on
Brexit. In places like the Labour marginal
of Brentford and Isleworth in south-west
London (fourth on the Tory hit list) local
Conservatives say they consider a candi-
date’s support for “social justice” to be as
important as anything else. A Tory oﬃ-
cial in Ealing Central and Acton, another

Remain-backing London constituency
that is second on the hit list, wants a
“Tory with a heart”.
The tight timetable should help Mrs
May to choose sympathetic candidates.
Normally, local Conservative associa-
tions spend months carefully choosing
their parliamentary candidate. Activists
tend to be to the right of the parliamenta-
ry party, and most would dearly love to
choose hard-Brexit candidates. Garry
Heath, a member of the Wycombe Con-
servative Association, wrote on the
ConservativeHome blog that the Tories
should “purge our party and deselect the
Remainers”.
Yet with the election only seven
weeks away, there is little time for local
parties to scour the land for suitable
hardliners. Conservative Central Oﬃce is
expected to step in and present local
associations with a shortlist of candi-
dates. These lists will reﬂect Mrs May’s
politics; in turn, the candidates will be
loyal to her if elected.
The easiest option in many cases will
be simply to reselect the candidate who
stood in the 2015 election. Back then,
most of the party’s leadership was in
favour of Remaining, albeit reluctantly.
Whatever happens, it looks as if Mrs
May’s prospective new MPs are unlikely
to give her too much trouble.

The Economist Apr il 22nd 2017

The Liberal Democrats

A Brexit bounce

B R I S T O L

The Lib Dems’ focus on Europe could
limit the Tories’ hoped-for landslide
CAMPAIGNING as a Liberal Democrat
in the 2015 general election was not a
happy experience, says Stephen Williams,
a former minister for local government.
The party was disliked for propping up the
Conservatives in a coalition government
in 2010-15 and for reneging on a pledge not
to raise university tuition fees. It scraped
just 8% of the vote, down from 23% in 2010.
“At times I felt like the most hated man in
Bristol,” Mr Williams sighs.
Now, 
though, 
things are 
looking
brighter for the Lib Dems. Last year no
party campaigned to remain in the Euro-
pean Union so vehemently. And now,
none is likely to beneﬁt so much from the
vote to Leave. The party’s noisy opposition
to the government’s proposed “hard
Brexit” has helped it to notch up some
spectacular swings in council and parlia-
mentary elections since the referendum
(see chart). Meanwhile, it faces only weak
competition for left-leaning voters from La-
bour, which is under catastrophically bad
management (see next story).
So the Lib Dems are optimistic about
their chances on June 8th. All 48 seats they
lost in 2015 will be “in play”, reckons Rob
Ford of the University of Manchester. A
10% swing to the Lib Dems would see them
pick up 40 seats, 25 of them from the Con-
servatives. They are unlikely to do quite
that well—partly because eight of those
seats are held by the Scottish National
Party, whose vote is likely to hold up, and
partly because the Liberals’ organisation is
still relatively weak after successive local
electoral drubbings. But Lib Dem watchers
guess the party could pick up more than 20
new seats. Popular former MPs including
Vince Cable, a former business secretary, 

1

Add Libs

Br itain, council by-elections 

Since June 23rd 2016, % point change

Conser vative

Labour

Lib Dem

60

40

20

+

0

–

20

40

60

J J

A

S

O

N

D

J

F

M A

2016

2017

Sources: Association of Liberal Democrat Councillors;
Englishelections.org; council websites

The Economist Apr il 22nd 2017 

2 and Simon Hughes, a former justice minis-
ter, have said they will seek to win back
their old constituencies. Nick Clegg, a for-
mer party leader and deputy prime minis-
ter, has conﬁrmed he will stand again.
Even before the EU referendum, strat-
egists had talked of building a reliable
“core vote” among internationalist young
urbanites. That job has now become a
good deal easier. Advertising the Lib Dems’
support for a “soft Brexit” is an obvious
way to attract the 48% who voted to Re-
main. In Bristol, where Mr Williams is run-
ning for the new post of mayor of the West
of England, he misses few opportunities to
remind voters of the Lib Dems’ position on
Europe. At City Hall he tells a crowd of eth-
nic-minority businessfolk that Indian-Brit-
ish relations are “going to be even more im-
portant if we go over the Brexit cliﬀ.” Tory
pollsters fret that a Liberal raid on Remain
voters might eat into the government’s ex-
pected majority, with London and the
south-west of England, the Lib Dems’ his-
torical stronghold, particularly vulnerable.
The party’s position on Brexit has also
helped it to win back protest voters, who
abandoned the party when it got into bed
with the Conservatives in 2010. Mark Pack,
a Lib Dem strategist, notes that support for
close relations with the EU is now the
“anti-establishment position”. According
to a recent poll by Opinium, only a third of
voters now think that the party was wrong
to have entered into coalition with the To-
ries. Meanwhile, its appeal seems to go be-
yond Europhiles: since the referendum the
party has picked up more council seats in
Leave-voting areas than Remain ones.
With just nine MPs, the Lib Dems have
so far struggled to gain a hearing. Some
reckon that part of the reason why they
have yet to see much of an uptick in the
polls is because most voters pay little atten-
tion to the party until they are forced to by
an election. The lacklustre leadership of
Tim Farron has not helped. He recently got
some attention, but only by refusing to say
whether he thought gay sex was a sin (he
later clariﬁed that he thinks homosexual-
ity is not). Polling suggests that voters think
he is doing no better a job than Jeremy Cor-
byn, Labour’s unpopular leader.
But there is cause for optimism on both
fronts. The party’s proﬁle will rise during
the campaign; the fact that it is the most
strident anti-Brexit party will attract televi-
sion cameras, says Mr Ford. Even if the
party’s national polling does not pick up, it
will pour resources into marginal seats,
while other parties will have to campaign
across the country. Moreover, what the Lib
Dems lack in leadership, they increasingly
make up for with boots on the ground. The
party claims that its membership has dou-
bled since the 2015 general election, to
more than 90,000. Opposition to a “hard
Brexit” provides them with a cause worth
ﬁghting for. 7

The opposition

Hard work for
Labour

The outlook for the Labour Party is
grim—and things may get worse
WHICH year will turn out to be the
comparison? Will it be 1983, when La-
bour won just 209 seats under Michael
Foot? Could it look more like 1935, when it
secured 154? Or might the party confound
pollsters, and the government, and im-
prove its current tally of 229? The party
trails the Conservatives by 20-odd points,
so its prospects look dim.
Labour’s fate in June depends on the
behaviour of its past supporters. Less than
half of those who voted Labour in 2015
would still do so, according to polls by You-
Gov. Instead 10% would vote for the Liberal
Democrats, 7% for the Conservatives and
24% say they do not know. Another 4% say
they will not vote at all.
Labour has captured some support
from the Green Party, youngsters and those
who have not voted before. But the voters
it has lost are old, working class and—cru-
cially—dependable. In return, says Marcus
Roberts of YouGov, it has gained unreliable
voters with no history of supporting La-
bour or indeed turning out at all.
The party faces myriad threats. Accord-
ing to YouGov’s analysis, any constituency
where Labour has a lead of less than 14%
over the Tories would turn blue. Fifty-six
of Labour’s 229 seats qualify. Meanwhile
the Liberal Democrats will be eyeing hun-
grily those such as Cambridge, where Dan-
iel Zeichner, the Labour MP, has a majority

Br itain 47

of just 599 and which voted overwhelm-
ingly against Brexit.
Theresa May put Brexit and the ques-
tion of leadership at the centre of her call
for an election, knowing that both are
weaknesses for Labour. Voters still don’t
know where the party stands on Brexit.
That uncertainty comes from the impossi-
bility of devising a policy that satisﬁes
both Labour’s metropolitan Remain voters
and its working-class Leavers in northern
England and the Midlands. As for leader-
ship, even among habitual Labour voters,
fewer than half want to send Jeremy Cor-
byn to Downing Street.
Labour’s hopes rest on changing the
subject from Brexit to matters on which it is
stronger, such as the National Health Ser-
vice, housing and schools. The NHS, in par-
ticular, is an area where it is still more
trusted than the Tories. A predicted defeat
for Labour in a by-election in Stoke Central
in February failed to materialise, after vot-
ers seemed less interested in Brexit than in
domestic matters. The collapse of the pop-
ulist UK Independence Party will help La-
bour in its working-class heartlands.
Nonetheless, many of Mr Corbyn’s
own MPs are unenthusiastic. John Wood-
cock, who represents Barrow and Furness
and has a majority of just 795, said in a vid-
eo to his constituents on April 19th that al-
though he would be seeking re-election, he
could not endorse Mr Corbyn as prime
minister. Others are quitting. Alan John-
son, a former Labour home secretary and
Gisela Stuart are among those who have
said they will not stand.
In the absence of a popular leader, La-
bour MPs will have to campaign locally
and individually. But building personal
brands takes time, and that is in short sup-
ply. Just as after the Iraq war some Labour
MPs distanced themselves from Tony Blair
(who may this time campaign with the Lib-
eral Democrats against Brexit), Labour can-
didates may try to avoid Mr Corbyn. He
might make that easy for them. Labour
sources reckon he will run this election like
his leadership campaign, travelling to safe
seats represented by friendly MPs and
holding big rallies in front of adoring
crowds. He will avoid talking about the EU
as far as possible, leaving the diﬃcult work
of coming up with a position on it to Sir
Keir Starmer, his Brexit spokesman.
Some are already pondering what Mr
Corbyn would do in the event of a defeat.
Most leaders would resign, but Mr Corbyn
may not. He is determined to lower the lev-
el of parliamentary support required by
would-be leadership candidates before
their names can go on the ballot sent to
members. They currently need the signa-
tures of 15% of MPs; Mr Corbyn would like
to cut it to 5%, to ensure that a left-wing can-
didate can replace him when he steps
down. If he clings on to push that through,
Labour’s agony may be prolonged. 7

48 Br itain

The Economist Apr il 22nd 2017

Bagehot

Theresa May, Tory of Tories

The prime minister’s vision for Britain is slowly coming into focus

She rules her cabinet with a rod of iron with the enthusiastic help
of her longtime aides, Nick Timothy and Fiona Hill, and has hap-
pily applied that rod to two of the most senior members of the
cabinet: the chancellor of the exchequer, Philip Hammond, and
the foreign secretary, Mr Johnson. 
Mrs May is not an ideas woman—she didn’t have any interest
in engaging with such Cameron-era clever clogs as Michael Gove
and Mr Osborne. But she nevertheless has a sense of what sort of
country she wants. Her Britain is the Britain of the provincial Tory
heartlands: a Britain of solid values and rooted certainties, hard
work and upward mobility, a Britain where people try to get
ahead but also have time for the less fortunate. 
Mr Cameron was never really at home with the Tory middle
classes. In some ways he was too grand: the Old Etonian married
into the aristocracy and has taken to shooting in his retirement. In
other ways he was too metropolitan: he didn’t want to have to
apologise for his party to the liberal elites of London or New York.
For Mrs May, the middling folk are her people. She was brought
up in the Cotswolds, the daughter of a Church of England vicar,
and still takes her Anglicanism seriously. She shinned her way up
the greasy pole from her local grammar school to Oxford and
from minor jobs in local politics to the highest oﬃce in the land.
At Oxford, the Cameroons went to grand colleges and joined the
Bullingdon, a posh, boorish dining club. Both were mainly oﬀ-
limits to women; Mrs May made do with a dowdier college and
relaxed by watching “The Goodies”, a particularly dire comedy.
The Cameroons became special advisers to ministers before be-
ing parachuted into safe seats. Mrs May didn’t get her seat, albeit
the plum one of Maidenhead, until she was 40. Her purge of the
Cameron gang was a vicious bit of class politics: a grammar-
school girl who had been patronised by a bunch of public-school
toﬀs plunging in the knife with skill and relish.

The emerging Mayism
Mrs May didn’t come to oﬃce like Thatcher with a well-worked
out ideology, or like Mr Cameron with a long-cherished “project”.
But her provincial prejudices are beginning to cohere into a politi-
cal doctrine: an updated version of the one-nation Toryism
which dominated the party before Thatcher pulverised it. Mrs
May is much more willing to contemplate intervention in the
market than her predecessors: she wants to make takeovers more
diﬃcult and has even talked about putting workers on boards. Mr
Timothy, her guru, is an admirer of Joseph Chamberlain, a Victor-
ian “people’s Tory” who led the campaign against free trade. Mrs
May is also much more worried about social atomisation than
has been the fashion in her party. Whereas Thatcher championed
liberal markets and Mr Cameron championed liberal morals, Mrs
May wants to rebuild communities that have been battered by
social change. Her disdain for “citizens of nowhere” is not just a
political ploy: she seriously thinks that Britain needs more pro-
vincial certainties as an antidote to rootless cosmopolitanism.
The winds are blowing strongly in Mrs May’s direction. La-
bour is in chaos. The Liberal Democrats are hampered by weak
leadership. The Scottish National Party is losing momentum: Mrs
May would relish the chance of heading oﬀ Scottish indepen-
dence by picking up a few seats north of the border. But these are
uncertain and volatile times: just look at the French election. And
even if Mrs May enhances her majority in June, as looks likely,
this apostle of one-nation Toryism will still be presiding over a
deeply divided country. 7

BEFORE her bolt-from-the-blue announcement that she was
calling a general election, most Britons had Theresa May
down as an honest plodder: a safe pair of hands who kept her
promises and did her homework. She trod water in the Home Of-
ﬁce for six years while David Cameron’s inner circle got on with
the job of reforming the country. She became prime minister only
because the Tory party was desperate for somebody who could
unite pro- and anti-Brexit factions after Mr Cameron’s resignation
following the referendum. Mrs May’s greatest qualiﬁcation for
the job was that she took a lukewarm position, as a reluctant Re-
mainer, on the most important issue of her time—hardly Chur-
chill on appeasement or Thatcher on the unions.
Yet Mrs May has scrambled her reputation as well as electrify-
ing British politics. A safe pair of hands? Some pollsters had ad-
vised Tory high-command not to risk an election on the grounds
48% of the country wants to stay in the European Union and Tory
voters (particularly in the south) might scatter to the winds. A pro-
mise-keeper? Mrs May had made a clear pledge not to hold a gen-
eral election before her time was up. A second-division politi-
cian? Calling an election was the sort of high-risk, high-reward
manoeuvre that could allow her to stamp her authority on the
country and her name in the history books. 
Mrs May was a more ambitious politician than the political
class realised. The Tory modernisers who surrounded David
Cameron had eyes only for each other: would George (Osborne)
replace David or would Boris ( Johnson) pip him to the post? Mrs
May was too dull to be bothered with. But she always had
thoughts above her station. As a sixth-former she announced
that she wanted to be Britain’s ﬁrst woman prime minister. She
trailed the idea of running for party leader when Michael How-
ard stood down in 2005. She spent her time in the Home Oﬃce
building a reputation as a competent administrator and waiting
for the shine to come oﬀ Mr Cameron’s modernisation project.
Mrs May turned out to be ruthless as well as ambitious. On be-
coming prime minister she summoned Mr Osborne for a chat. He
wanted to stay on as chancellor of the exchequer but told friends
that he was willing to be foreign secretary. She sacked him with a
ﬂea in his ear about promising more than he delivered, and fol-
lowed up by sacking almost all the rest of Mr Cameron’s cronies.

International

The Economist Apr il 22nd 2017 49

Neglected tropical diseases

Winning the endgame

G E N E V A

The remarkable tale of the global oﬀensive against a variety of ancient plagues
THE story begins with a mosquito bite.
of a Pandora’s box of horrors that have
As the bloodsucker feeds on a human,
long aﬄicted humans in the warm, wet
in some parts of the world there is the
places of the world. Evidence of some of
chance it will transmit the larvae of worms
them is found in mummiﬁed Egyptians;
which cause a disease called lymphatic ﬁl-
others are recorded in the Bible and the Tal-
ariasis (sometimes known as elephantia-
mud, and the writings of ancient scholars
sis). After many such bites, the larvae de-
such as Hippocrates. Modern science has
velop into thin microscopic worms which
established that they are transmitted by
invade the host’s lymphatic system, where
parasitic worms, bacteria, viruses, proto-
they grow into adult worms. During their
zoans and fungi.
seven-year lives these worms damage the
Some have names that may be unfamil-
lymphatic system, and cause infections
iar. Buruli ulcer, Chagas disease, guinea-
that lead to blockages, swelling and fevers. 
worm disease, leishmaniasis, river blind-
Upendo Mwingira, a programme man-
ness, trachoma and yaws are some of the 18
ager at the ministry of health in Tanzania,
now collectively referred to as “neglected
tropical diseases” (NTDs). Between them
sees patients with grossly swollen legs that
are painful and disabling. Male victims can
they aﬀect more than a billion people,
develop scrotums so large that they can de-
most of them poor, with blindness, immo-
scend to the knees. Their enlarged limbs
bility, disﬁgurement and often great pain.
may smell foul, as they become prone to
The resulting disabilities keep suﬀerers
infections. They may be shunned by their
mired in poverty; that poverty is also what
communities and often believe that their
allows the diseases to thrive.
sickness is a punishment for some past
Yet for some decades a remarkable and
misdeed. “Imagine how stigmatising it is,”
mostly unsung assault on NTDs has been
says Ms Mwingira. 
gathering pace. In the past ﬁve years it has
Globally, about 120m people are infect-
coalesced into a well-organised and well-
ed with lymphatic ﬁlariasis, of whom
funded plan that is cutting transmission
about a third are disﬁgured or incapacitat-
and pushing the number of new infections
ed. And this terrifying condition is just one
to previously unimaginable lows. There is

more than Pandora’s hope at the bottom of
the box: humanity is now capable of driv-
ing many NTDs out of existence by 2030.
The question is whether it will. 
David Molyneux, a parasitologist with
the Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine,
has been working on tropical diseases
since 1965. What struck him in those early
days was that it was possible to do great
good with simple remedies that were al-
ready available. In the 1950s and 1960s,
China eliminated lymphatic ﬁlariasis by
adding an anti-parasitic drug to table salt.
For sleeping sickness, surveillance and
“vector control” (such as spraying with in-
secticide and setting insect traps) were
highly eﬀective. Insecticides were also
known to work against other diseases. 
The beneﬁts went far beyond the direct
elimination of the suﬀering caused by
these conditions’ symptoms. As fewer peo-
ple were rendered disabled, more could
work. Dr Molyneux says it is now thought
that one of the reasons Japan and South
Korea developed so fast after the second
world war is that both ran major deworm-
ing programmes in schools.

Using the tools to hand
The turning-point for NTDs came with the
discovery of the drug ivermectin in the
1970s. Merck, a pharmaceutical ﬁrm that is
known as MSD outside America, devel-
oped it for parasitic infections in animals.
William Campbell, one of the ﬁrm’s para-
sitologists, thought it might be eﬀective
against the parasite that caused river blind-
ness, which is endemic in parts of Africa
and Latin America, and in Yemen. In its 

1

50 International

2 early stages river blindness causes rashes
and severe itching; later, it progressively
damages the retina. Mr Campbell urged his
bosses to see if the drug would work.
The ﬁrst human trial of ivermectin for
river blindness was in Senegal in 1981, in
patients who had the early stages of the
disease but no damage to their eyes. To-
gether with several more trials, it showed
that ivermectin was safe in humans and
highly eﬀective at killing the disease vector
in its larval state. But Merck had a problem:
there was no market for it. Those who
needed ivermectin were too poor to buy it.
So the ﬁrm did something remarkable: it
made an open-ended commitment to give
away as much of the drug as necessary,
starting in 1987, with the ultimate goal of
eliminating river blindness entirely. In the
following decade it donated 100m doses. 
Yet a miracle cure was not enough. The
biggest obstacle to tackling river blindness,
and other NTDs, turned out to be getting
the drug to those who needed it. That was
too complicated for any one company on
its own. Painstaking and costly logistical ef-
forts were required to get treatments to re-
mote areas. Prevalences had to be mapped,
and, for some of the diseases, individual
patients diagnosed. Since most of the af-
fected areas lacked health-care workers,
some had to be trained. The stigma and
disability faced by suﬀerers meant that
many were hidden within their communi-
ties; they had to be found and persuaded to
accept treatment. And after all that, surveil-
lance and follow-ups were required to stop
diseases making a comeback.

Troubles shared
Partnerships started to emerge between
countries where NTDs were endemic. In-
ternational institutions such as the World
Bank and World Health Organisation
(WHO) teamed up with donor govern-
ments and charities. By 1999 the Gates
Foundation, a charity set up by Bill and
Melinda Gates, was funding work in lym-
phatic ﬁlariasis and schistosomiasis, a de-
bilitating ailment caused by a parasitic
worm transmitted by freshwater snails. 
By then the long-running eﬀort to eradi-
cate guinea worm led by the Carter Centre,
a foundation set up by Jimmy Carter in
1982, had gained pace. The worm’s larvae
are ingested in dirty water and grow inter-
nally to as long as a metre; they emerge,
agonisingly, through the skin over several
weeks. The only treatment for an estab-
lished case, even now, is to speed up this
expulsion by gradually winding the
worm’s emerging body on a stick. But pub-
lic-information campaigns about the need
to ﬁlter drinking water and keep suﬀerers
away from water sources, where they
might pass on the infection, have brought
new cases down from an estimated 3.5m a
year globally in 1986, when eradication ef-
forts started, to 25 last year. 

Other drug ﬁrms, including GSK, Pﬁzer
and Novartis, started to donate medicines
on a large scale for other conditions. These
included albendazole, another anti-para-
sitic for lymphatic ﬁlariasis; azithromycin,
an antibiotic that works against trachoma
(a bacterial infection that can cause blind-
ness); and a combination of drugs for lep-
rosy (another bacterial infection, which
leads to skin lesions and nerve damage).
Yet these disjointed initiatives added up to
less than what was needed. In an article in
2004 in the Lancet, a medical journal, Dr
Molyneux argued that these diseases were
unfairly neglected in comparison with tu-
berculosis, malaria and HIV/AIDS, which
were the subject of well-funded global pro-
grammes. Experience in a range of coun-
tries showed that these diseases could be
controlled, he reminded his readers—and
doing so brought dividends besides the re-
lief of great suﬀering.
For example, the control of river blind-
ness in west Africa has been described by
the World Bank as one of the most cost-ef-
fective ways to reduce premature death
and disability in poor countries. Each dol-
lar spent on the control of lymphatic ﬁlari-
asis in China, or Chagas disease in Brazil,
has been estimated to produce beneﬁts of
$15 and $17 respectively, by reducing spend-
ing on treatment and cutting the number
of prematurely curtailed working lives.
Some disease-control programmes had
built logistics for distributing drugs from
scratch, which could be used for other pub-
lic-health eﬀorts, and had strengthened na-
tional health systems more broadly.
By the turn of the millennium the com-
mon features of a group of tropical dis-
eases were increasingly recognised by pub-
lic-health experts, donors and the WHO.
They were diseases of poverty but also
causes of poverty. They caused disability
and made it harder to absorb nutrients in
food; reduced school attendance, thus con-
demning children to a life of grunt work;
and trapped families in poverty when
breadwinners were too sick to work or
farm. Though prevention and treatment

The Economist Apr il 22nd 2017

methods varied, there was clear potential
for combining attempts to control or even
eradicate them. Some required the sup-
pression of vectors such as ﬂies and mos-
quitoes, for example by spraying insecti-
cides or distributing bednets. Some could
be tackled by dosing entire communities
with cheap, safe drugs; others by identify-
ing and managing individual cases over ex-
tended periods. And most could be greatly
reduced by providing safe drinking water,
sanitation and information about hygiene.

Gateway to success
The Gates Foundation has helped a lot. In
2010 Mr Gates and Tachi Yamada, who
leads the foundation’s global health pro-
gramme, invited the bosses of a group of
drug companies to tell them what could be
done to tackle the ﬁeld’s greatest chal-
lenges. The ﬁrms said that they wanted
help to deliver the free drugs that they
were oﬀering. At around the same time the
WHO created a detailed plan for control-
ling each of the NTDs.
Finally, the stage was set for an ambi-
tious global coalition. Margaret Chan, the
director-general of the WHO, and Mr Gates
were able to rally charities, NGOs, big do-
nors (such as the governments of America,
Britain and the United Arab Emirates) and,
crucially, 13 drug ﬁrms. Many, including
Merck KGaA, Johnson & Johnson and Gil-
ead, had been donating treatments for
years. Others, including Eisai, a Japanese
ﬁrm, were new to the ﬁght. Together, they
declared themselves ready to give away
drugs worth billions of dollars each year.
In 2012 the group signed the “London Dec-
laration” which promised to control, elim-
inate or eradicate ten NTDs by the end of
the decade. 
Five would be controlled with mass
drug administration: lymphatic ﬁlariasis,
river blindness, schistosomiasis, trachoma
and diseases caused by helminths (parasit-
ic worms such as hookworm and round-
worm) that spend part of their lifecycles in
soil. Tackling the rest, including sleeping
sickness and Chagas disease—both parasit-

1

Countr ies dispensing preventive drugs for a selection of neglected tropical diseases*

By number of diseases, 2015
1
2
3
4

5

No drugs required

No data

WESTERN
MED.

Chad

3.9

SOUTH-EAST
ASIA

Sr i Lanka

20

Mexico

Guatemala

Colombia

Ethiopia

AMERICAS

Ecuador

0.7

AFRICA

Togo

188

South
Sudan

Maldives

Cambodia

1.5

WESTERN
PACIFIC

Cook Is.

Niue

Marshall Is.

Vanuatu

Source: WHO

*Lymphatic f ilar iasis,
r iver blindness,
schistosomiasis,
soil-transmitted
helminthiases,
trachoma

Countr ies that have eliminated:
r iver blindness,
lymphatic f ilar iasis,
2013-16
2016-Apr 2017

The only countr ies
with cases of guinea-
worm disease in 2016

The Economist Apr il 22nd 2017 

2 ic diseases transmitted by insect bites—
would require the identiﬁcation and treat-
ment of infected individuals.
Since the signing of the London declara-
tion, the alliance against NTDs has devel-
oped into the largest and most successful
public-health initiative in history. The
number of people at risk globally from
NTDs has fallen by 20%. Most of Latin
America has eliminated river blindness.
The number of new cases of leprosy has
declined in eight of the past nine years. In
the past year eight countries eliminated
lymphatic ﬁlariasis. The number of cases
of sleeping sickness is at its lowest in 75
years, and eradication is now thought pos-
sible. In 2015, 1.5bn treatment doses were
donated by drug ﬁrms, and almost a bil-
lion people received them—an increase of
more than a third since 2012. 
Critics of foreign aid often charge that it
weakens the countries that receive it, by
undermining their economies and gover-
nance. But support for tackling NTDs, and
other health problems, has shown quite
the opposite eﬀect. It removes an obstacle
that stops abjectly poor people bettering
themselves. And, like eﬀorts to control ma-
laria, tuberculosis and HIV/AIDS, it im-
proves public-health systems and disease
surveillance. As countries become more
organised they can often combine their
programmes. The excellent results are per-
suading some recipient countries to chip
in: a quarter of programmes on NTDs in the
Democratic Republic of Congo, for exam-
ple, are now locally funded, up from none
in 2011. Aid given to set up the infrastruc-
ture needed to tackle polio in Nigeria
meant that the country was better placed
to ﬁght Ebola when that disease emerged. 

To elimination and beyond
It is tempting to extrapolate, and predict
that all 18 NTDs will be consigned to his-
tory. Progress might even speed up: new di-
agnostic tools and treatments are on their
way. The Gates Foundation is paying for ﬁ-
nal trials of a triple-drug therapy for lym-
phatic ﬁlariasis that clears the parasite
from infected people’s bodies far more ef-
fectively than current treatments. When
they are completed later this year, India
might be able to get rid of the disease in just
a couple of years, and other countries
could quickly follow. 
Mr Gates thinks that it should also be
possible to get visceral leishmaniasis, a
parasitic disease that destroys the internal
organs, down to tiny numbers of new in-
fections in Asia. (To public-health aﬁciona-
dos, “eliminating” a disease means mak-
ing it
rare, rather
than completely
eradicating it.) By 2030 he hopes to see just
170m people globally at risk of NTDs, down
from 1.7bn now. For that to happen drug
companies will need to remain strongly
committed; that means making sure they
receive “well-deserved” credit, he says. 

Lymphatic ﬁlar iasis, soon to be histor y

But what worries some, including the
authors of the WHO’s latest report on
NTDs, published on April 19th at a summit
in Geneva to evaluate progress and gather
new donations, is the endgame. “Some-
times the last mile is the hardest,” says Ken
Gustavsen, who runs corporate responsi-
bility for Merck. As eﬀorts to control a dis-
ease are successful, the sense of urgency
fades, making it hard to maintain the politi-
cal momentum. Tackling some of the NTDs
requires long-term commitment. Chagas
will have to be tracked into the remote
reaches of the Amazon basin; diminished
concern about canine rabies is already
weakening attempts to eradicate it in Latin
America. A campaign in 1952-64 against
yaws, a bacterial infection that attacks
skin, bone and cartilage, provides an ob-
ject lesson. As cases became fewer, fund-
ing and attention shifted away, and in the
1970s the disease rebounded.
There are fears that something similar
could happen with guinea-worm disease.
Its imminent demise has been declared
prematurely several times in recent years.
Last year’s tally of 25 reported cases was
slightly higher than the ﬁgure for 2015. For-
tunately, it can be transmitted only if an in-
fected person enters drinking water
around the time when a worm is leaving
the body, meaning the disease would be
slow to bounce back, unlike, say, polio,
which is passed on through fecal matter
and could quickly return from near-extinc-
tion if eradication eﬀorts were to slacken. 
But wiping out guinea-worm disease,
as the London declaration envisages, and
controlling or eliminating the other NTDs,
will take continued focus—and plenty
more money. A big worry is whether the
governments that fund much drug distri-
bution, chief among them America’s and
Britain’s, will continue to do so. This week
the British government said it would dou-
ble spending on NTDs over the next ﬁve
years, to £360m ($460m). But the depart-

International 51

ment responsible for aid was reluctant to
provide a spokesman to discuss the pro-
gramme. And a turn to insularity in many
rich countries means foreign aid is increas-
ingly criticised. British newspapers have
become strikingly hostile towards it, argu-
ing that most is squandered, and that even
if it were not, the money is needed to cut
poverty at home. The Daily Mail, one of
the most splenetic, frequently splashes sto-
ries of wasted aid on its front page (often
blaming the European Union). It is cam-
paigning for Britain’s government to aban-
don a pledge, passed into law in 2015, to
earmark 0.7% of GDP for foreign aid. 
In America Donald Trump’s adminis-
tration has said it wants to slash the budget
of the state department, the part of govern-
ment responsible for most foreign-aid
spending. Mr Gates, who recently met Mr
Trump, remarks that it is unlikely Congress
will allow drastic cuts. But even a modest
trimming of American spending on NTDs
would be worrisome, if it discouraged
spending by other governments.
Private donors could ﬁll part of the gap,
but not all. Plenty ﬁnd the cause appealing,
says Ellen Agler of the END Fund, which
co-ordinates philanthropy for NTDs with
those of governments and international
organisations: “The clear return on invest-
ment is so powerful, and the timeline is so
short.” Since the fund was set up in 2012 it
has treated more than 140m people at risk
in 26 countries, and raised more than $75m
from individuals, corporate foundations
and philanthropic groups. Its donors bring
more than their money, says Ms Agler: they
strengthen oversight, and provide private-
sector problem-solving skills—and some-
times local contacts and logistical support. 
The eﬀort to defeat NTDs produces
plenty of heart-warming stories. In Tanza-
nia Ms Mwingira talks about men with
lymphatic ﬁlariasis who have received sur-
gery to reduce the size of their genitals and
can return to normal life, marry and have
children. Koﬁ Nyarko, a former leprosy pa-
tient who lives in Ghana, says he would be
dead without treatment. It came too late to
save his hands from deformity; they are
twisted and rigid. But he has been able to
achieve his dream of becoming a special-
needs teacher.

Where charity begins
It is worth recalling the motivation for
Merck’s original decision, back in 1987, to
donate ivermectin for river blindness, says
Mr Gustavsen. There was no economic ra-
tionale: the ﬁrm’s scientists simply felt it
was the right thing to do. Having discov-
ered the drug, and established that it
worked against a disease that caused aw-
ful suﬀering, neglecting to use it would
have been “incredibly demoralising”, he
says. That sense of moral purpose must not
weaken if the global coalition against
NTDs is ﬁnally to prevail. 7

FORTUNE
FAVOURS
THE PREPARED.

Identifying a great opportunity requires a 
ready mind. At The University of Chicago 
Booth School of Business, we’re preparing 
MBA students with the analytical rigor, 
intellectual frameworks, and global network 
they need to rise above any challenge and 
succeed in any market.

GET READY FOR SUCCESS.
Visit WhyBooth.com

Business

China’s internet giants 

Three kingdoms, two empires

S H A N G H A I

China’s internet giants battle at home and abroad 
THERE was a time, not that long ago,
lightly regulated. Facebook, Apple and
when China’s big internet companies
Google, in contrast, face increasing scruti-
were dismissed by investors in Silicon Val-
ny. Chinese internet ﬁrms can achieve mar-
ley as marginal ﬁrms with a tendency to
ket domination of a sort that would attract
copy Western products. Not any more. To-
close attention in other markets.
day they are monsters with increasingly
The third diﬀerence is that they can suc-
hefty international ambitions.
ceed on a rapid and massive scale because
Alibaba, China’s biggest e-commerce
the state-dominated economy is so ineﬃ-
group, handles more transactions each
cient. Often there is not even a physical in-
year than do eBay and Amazon combined.
frastructure to leapfrog—so-called third-
Jack Ma, its chairman, pledges to serve 2bn
tier cities, for example, often lack big retail
consumers around the world within 20
centres. Nationwide there is one shopping
years. Tencent, which specialises in online
mall per 1.2m people.
games and social media, is now the
A huge home market has not stopped
world’s tenth most valuable public ﬁrm,
the trio from ﬁghting bloody turf wars
worth some $275bn. Pony Ma (no relation),
among each other. The outcome to this bat-
its chairman, wants China to “preside over
the global tech revolution of the future”.
But as the two ﬁrms become global forces,
the third member of China’s “BAT” trio of
internet giants, Baidu, an online-search
ﬁrm that came to dominate the mainland
market after Google left the country to
avoid censorship, is lagging behind.
All three ﬁrms diﬀer from their Western
peers in important ways. First, Western
companies usually prefer to focus on a few
core areas, whereas Chinese internet ﬁrms
typically try to do everything from cloud
computing to digital payments. When this
works, as with Tencent’s wildly successful
app, WeChat, the results can be impressive. 
Second, with the exception of political
censorship, the internet sector in China is

Source: Company repor ts

BAT order

Net prof it

Revenue

Yuan bn

Tencent

0

30

60

90

120

150

2015

2016

Tencent

Alibaba

Baidu

Alibaba

Baidu

The Economist Apr il 22nd 2017 53

Also in this section
54 AkzoNobel ﬁghts its corner
55 Donald Trump and tour ism
56 Recreational vehicles
56 Fast food in Japan
58 Net neutrality 
60 Schumpeter: Life in the public eye

For daily coverage of business, visit
Economist.com/business-ﬁnance 

tle is rapidly becoming clear. Tencent and
Alibaba are surging ahead; a series of own
goals has left Baidu far behind. The com-
mon jibe about Baidu among local experts
is that it is becoming the Yahoo of China, a
once-dominant search giant that sank ow-
ing to a lack of innovation and a series of
management blunders. 
Its revenue growth fell to 6.3% in 2016,
down from 35% in 2015 and 54% in 2014.
The ﬁrm gets some nine-tenths of its rev-
enues from online ads, but this income is
plunging as marketers redirect spending
from search ads on Baidu to social-media
networks like WeChat and mobile-com-
merce platforms run by Alibaba. Mean-
while, Baidu is burning cash trying to keep
its various big bets on artiﬁcial intelligence
(AI), online video, virtual and augmented-
reality technologies, and “online to oﬄine”
(O2O) services going. One of China’s most
respected business consultants is pessimis-
tic about its future: “There is very little
chance they’ll be relevant in ﬁve years.”
Of the other two giants, Tencent is prob-
ably the most fearsome. It already has
higher revenues and proﬁts than Alibaba
(see chart). Its value is set to climb as it
ramps up advertising on WeChat (provid-
ed that does not provoke a backlash from
users). Its main weapon against Alibaba is
its stake in JD.com, the country’s second-
biggest e-commerce ﬁrm, led by Richard
Liu, one of China’s most aggressive and
successful serial entrepreneurs.
JD.com has adopted an expensive “as-
set-heavy” business model akin to Ama-
zon’s in America. Thus far, its vast invest-
ments
in warehouses, 
logistics and
couriers have not come anywhere near
toppling Alibaba. But last year the com-
pany saw its revenues rise to $37.5bn, up
from $28bn the previous year. Its share of
China’s business-to-consumer market rose

1

54 Business

Game of dragons

Selected investments over $1bn, since Jan 2016 

By groups led by major Chinese internet f irms

Alibaba

Baidu

Tencent

Target company 

Sector 

Amount, $bn

Intime 
Didi Chuxing 
Ele.com 
Lazada 
Lyf t 
iQiyi 
Uber China 
Flipkar t 
Tesla 
China Music Corp 
Didi Chuxing 
Supercell 
Meituan-Dianping 

Lufax 

Retail 
Transpor t 
Food deliver y 
E-commerce 
Transpor t 
Online video 
Transpor t 
E-commerce 
Automobiles 
Online music 
Transpor t 
Online gaming 
Ticket booking/
restaurant reviews 
Financial 

2.6
4.5
1.2
1.0
1.0
1.5
2.0
1.4
1.8
2.7*
4.5
8.6*

3.3
1.2

Sources: ITJUZI; Crunchbase

*Estimate

2 to 25% in 2016, up from 18% at the end of
2014. If Mr Liu’s investments in infrastruc-
ture start to pay oﬀ, much of Alibaba’s fu-
ture domestic growth could be at risk. 
That threat may explain why Mr Ma is
not content with Alibaba’s overall 70%
share of the local e-commerce market. In
2016 it spent $1bn to win control of Lazada,
South-East Asia’s biggest e-commerce ﬁrm.
In March Lazada launched a new service
for Singaporeans directly to shop on Tao-
bao, one of Alibaba’s two domestic e-com-
merce platforms (the other is Tmall). 
Mr Ma last year persuaded the G20
summit of leading countries to endorse his
proposal for an “electronic world trade
platform” (eWTP), to make it easier for
small businesses to trade across borders.
Last month Alibaba launched a “digital
free-trade zone” as part of the initiative, in
Malaysia. This public-private partnership,
which involves simplifying both logistics
and payments, will help small merchants.
Mr Ma’s chief weapon for going global,
however, is Ant Financial, which was spun
out of Alibaba before the latter’s $25bn ﬂo-
tation in 2014 in New York. In China the
unit oﬀers services ranging from online
banking to investment products; it even
runs the mainland’s ﬁrst proper consumer
credit-scoring agency, Sesame Credit,
which uses big data to work out the credit-
worthiness of punters. Ant already has
more than 450m customers in China and is
going overseas with gusto. 
It has investments in local online-pay-
ments ﬁrms in Thailand, the Philippines,
Singapore and South Korea. In America
Ant is in a frenzied bidding and lobbying
war with Euronet, an American rival, to
buy MoneyGram International, a money-
transfer ﬁrm. On April 17th Ant raised its
initial oﬀer for MoneyGram by over a third
to $1.2bn, topping Euronet’s bid.

Tencent is also making bold acquisi-
tions abroad. A consortium that it led spent
$8.6bn to acquire Finland’s Supercell last
year, a deal that turned Tencent into the
world’s biggest purveyor of online games.
Together with Taiwan’s Foxconn, a con-
tract-manufacturing giant, the ﬁrm invest-
ed $175m last year into Hike Messenger, an
Indian messaging app akin to America’s
WhatsApp. It was also an early investor in
America’s Snapchat, another popular mes-
saging app, whose parent company Snap
went public in March. 
One reason for these purchases is that
Tencent’s earlier eﬀorts to promote We-
Chat abroad (including a splashy advertis-
ing campaign in Europe featuring Lionel
Messi, a footballer) ﬂopped. Established
social networks such as Facebook and
WhatsApp proved too entrenched to dis-
lodge. They also did some copying of their
own: once they adopted some of WeChat’s
innovations, Western consumers had little
reason to switch to the Chinese network. 
Such investments have been in Ten-
cent’s core areas, away from turf occupied
by Alibaba and Baidu. Sometimes, the trio
end up co-operating, if not by design. All
three BAT ﬁrms are backers of Didi Chux-
ing, a ride-hailing ﬁrm with global preten-
sions of its own. But in other ways their do-
mestic war is spilling into foreign markets. 
India is one such battleground. This
month, together with eBay and Microsoft,
Tencent invested $1.4bn into Flipkart, a
leading Indian online retailer. Alibaba and
Ant together are reported to have invested
nearly $900m in Paytm, India’s top online-
payments ﬁrm; 
in February, Paytm
launched an e-commerce portal akin to
Alibaba’s Tmall to take on Flipkart and
Amazon in India. 
Elsewhere, Tencent unveiled a service
last month that will allow ﬁrms in Europe
to use WeChat to sell on the mainland. This
will let them sell directly into China, avoid-
ing red tape. Tencent also recently invested
$1.8bn in America’s Tesla, a pioneer in elec-
tric and autonomous vehicles. That is a
particular challenge to Baidu, which is bet-
ting its future on machine learning and AI. 
Baidu’s push abroad is mainly a way to
get access to talent in these ﬁelds. The ﬁrm
has just started its ﬁrst recruiting campaign
at top American universities, including
Stanford University and the Massachu-
setts Institute of Technology. It has a re-
spected AI laboratory in Silicon Valley, de-
spite the recent departure of Andrew Ng,
an AI expert. But Baidu does not have the
same ﬁrepower as Alibaba and Tencent. It
tried but has failed to conquer foreign mar-
kets such as Japan with its search engine.
This week it opened up its self-driving
technology to rivals, as Tesla did in 2014,
but it has a long way to go before it makes
an impact in autonomous driving. 
Grandiose BAT statements about global
aims should be taken with a pinch of salt. It

The Economist Apr il 22nd 2017

would be an error to neglect the proﬁtable
domestic market. Goldman Sachs, an in-
vestment bank, reckons that China’s on-
line retail market will more than double in
size by 2020, to $1.7trn. As Duncan Clark,
author of a recent book on Alibaba, points
out, whatever headlines Mr Ma and other
internet bosses make with their overseas
ventures, “it takes a lot to get away from the
sheer gravity of China.” But at home and
abroad, one thing is clear: China’s internet
titans cannot be ignored. 7

AkzoNobel

The varnished
truth

P A R I S

A Dutch ﬁrm’s awkward eﬀorts to resist
a $24bn American takeover
THE future for AkzoNobel is dazzling—if
you believe Ton Büchner, its chief exec-
utive. The boss of the Dutch paint-and-
coatings ﬁrm reported a solid set of quar-
terly earnings on April 19th, then promised
a new era of rapid growth and invest-
ments. Shareholders are to get lavish divi-
dends this year. The ﬁrm will break up its
ungainly conglomerate structure. A speci-
ality-chemicals part of the business will be
sold or listed separately next year.
Mr Büchner has no choice but to talk
things up, if he is to justify rebuﬃng two re-
cent takeover oﬀers from a similar-sized
American rival, PPG. Its latest bid, of
€22.5bn ($24bn) in cash and shares, repre-
sented a 40% premium over Akzo’s market
value before the ﬁrst bid. An activist fund,
Elliott Management, which has a 3% stake
in Akzo, is pushing other shareholders to
demand discussion of the bid. 

1

He’s not Dutch either

 
2

The Economist Apr il 22nd 2017 

PPG’s

Akzo’s promises were welcome. But
like a newly opened tin of paint, they made
some heads spin. After years of eking out
smallish gains mostly through cost-cutting,
the ﬁrm is suddenly to boom. Akzo had
previously forecast that returns on sales
would be 11% by 2018, already well over its
average of less than 9% since 2008; now
the CEO promises a rate of 14% by 2020.
The ﬁrm, which had revenues of €14.2bn
in 2016, has emerged from a diﬃcult per-
iod. It bought Britain’s Imperial Chemical
Industries (ICI), the owner of Dulux paint
and other products, a decade ago, absorb-
ing it as Europe fell into a slump. The
group’s recovery since looks solid, but not
of the sort to match Mr Büchner’s bold tar-
gets. “It is a huge stretch, it looks really
tough,” is the verdict of Jeremy Redenius of
Sanford C. Bernstein, a research ﬁrm.
chief
executive, Michael
McGarry, this week wrote an open letter
explaining that merging the two strongest
ﬁrms in many markets for paints and coat-
ings makes sense, given consolidation in
the wider chemicals sector. The European
Commission cleared the merger of Dow
Chemical and DuPont in March, to create a
ﬁrm worth $130bn. Though Akzo and PPG
have some overlapping businesses, nota-
bly in Britain and France, antitrust risks
should be manageable.
A third PPG oﬀer is likely in the near fu-
ture. That Mr Büchner is now talking about
numbers is an improvement on his initial
talk of “cultural” diﬀerences between ﬁrms
and his complaints that Mr McGarry’s ap-
proach, during the recent Dutch election,
was tactless. But rising nationalism among
Dutch politicians and voters could indeed
help with fending oﬀ a takeover, says Ron
Meyer of TIAS business school in Tilburg.
A political outcry helped to scotch Kraft
Heinz’s recent pursuit of Unilever, a bigger
part-Dutch conglomerate. A foreign bid for
the privatised Dutch postal service was
also repelled last year.
PPG has talked of doing a deal by June.
So far relations have been cordial, but
Akzo’s managers dislike Elliott’s aggres-
sion, such as its call for the sacking of the
chairman of the supervisory board. Elliott
this week dismissed the strategic review as
“incomplete” and threatened to use the
Dutch courts if Akzo turned down its re-
quest for a special shareholder meeting to
oust the chairman. Akzo has some protec-
tion if things turn hostile, notably an inde-
pendent foundation that appoints board
directors, which may mean a legal battle. 
If so, Mr Büchner might well appeal to
Dutch nationalist sentiment. Yet doing so
is risky. Akzo brags of a swashbuckling his-
tory, back to 1792, of growing with acquisi-
tions, many abroad. Shunning foreigners
now would look hypocritical and short-
sighted. Mr Büchner seems painted into a
corner: either he will be held to unrealistic
promises, or he will give way to PPG. 7

Donald Trump and tour ism

Keep out

N EW Y O R K

New security measures menace
inbound tourism to America
T RUMP Tower, in midtown Manhattan,
has become a modern-day Mount Ver-
non. Tourists have long visited George
Washington’s homestead. Now they ven-
ture through Trump Tower’s brass doors to
ogle the decor—“it’s so gold,” said a Ger-
man teenager standing near the lobby’s
waterfall on a recent afternoon—or buy
souvenirs. The Choi family, visiting from
South Korea, wandered the marble ex-
panse with their new “Make America
Great” hats (three for $50). 
The question for America’s hoteliers
and airlines is whether such visitors are
just anomalies. A strong dollar is one rea-
son for foreigners to avoid visiting Ameri-
ca. Donald Trump may prove another, sug-
gests a growing collection of data. Yet
measuring the precise impact of Mr
Trump’s presidency on travel is diﬃcult. In
addition to the currency eﬀect, many trips
currently being taken to America were
booked before his election. Marriott, a big
hotel company, reported an overall in-
crease, compared with a year earlier, in for-
eign bookings in America in February. 
But Arne Sorenson, Marriott’s boss, has
voiced concern about a potential slump in
tourism. In February, ForwardKeys, a tra-
vel-data ﬁrm, reported that in the week
after Mr Trump ﬁrst tried to ban travel from
seven Muslim-majority countries, interna-
tional bookings dropped by 6.5% against
the same period in 2016. Hopper, a travel
app, found that average daily searches for
ﬂights to America have declined in 99
countries since Mr Trump tried to issue his

Search and stop

Daily average search volume for f lights to US

Change from before Donald Trump’s inauguration* 
to af ter news of the f irst travel ban†, %

60

40

20

–

0

+

20

40

60

China
Iran
Turkey
Saudi Arabia
Brazil
Germany
Mexico
Netherlands
France
Japan
Br itain
Israel
Russia

Source: Hopper

*20th Jan 2017    †27th Jan 2017

Business 55

travel ban, compared with the last weeks
of Barack Obama’s term. Russia is one of
the few places where demand has risen
(see chart). Tourism Economics, a forecast-
er, expects 2m fewer foreign visits to Amer-
ica this year, a 1% drop from 2016. Without
Mr Trump it had expected a 3% jump.
Some sort of fall-oﬀ would be unsur-
prising. On March 6th Mr Trump issued a
new, revised travel ban from six Muslim-
majority countries. The measure is mired
in litigation, but that does not give visitors
from the aﬀected countries much comfort.
On March 17th Rex Tillerson, the secretary
of state, gave broad instructions for consu-
lar oﬃcials to identify “populations war-
ranting increased scrutiny” and adjust
visa-processing accordingly. Such vetting
would cover a much broader swathe of the
globe than the ban. Then oﬃcials barred
on-board laptops for travellers from some
airports in the Middle East and north Afri-
ca. (Britain issued a similar prohibition.)
The laptop ban has simply prompted
some business travellers who work in the
Middle East to book ﬂights with a layover
in Europe so that they can use laptops on-
board, says Greeley Koch of the Associa-
tion of Corporate Travel Executives. But
closer scrutiny of visa applications will
probably lead to delays and fewer visas.
Tourists who oppose Mr Trump’s policies
may go elsewhere. This week Emirates, an
airline based in Dubai, said it would re-
duce ﬂights to ﬁve American cities from
May, owing to lower demand. 
The industry has been here before. In-
ternational tourism in America slumped
by around 3% each year from 2000 to 2006.
Most analysts blame not only the attacks
of 2001 but stricter visa rules and anti-
American sentiment abroad. Countries
that had the dimmest view of America, ac-
cording to surveys during that period,
tended to see drops in travellers there, says
Adam Sacks of Tourism Economics. “We
are facing a potential rerun,” he says. Dara
Khosrowshahi, head of Expedia, an online
booking site, has noted that American ho-
tels and airlines are already cutting prices
in an attempt to lure travellers.
America’s main tourism lobby group is
now urging Mr Trump, who presumably
has some sympathy with other hoteliers,
to emphasise that the country continues to
welcome foreign visitors despite all the
new security measures. The tourism agen-
cy for New York city, NYC & Company, is
trying to counteract negative rhetoric from
Washington, DC with advertisements in
Britain, Germany, Mexico and Spain. 
In the capital itself, any loss of visitors
from abroad may be oﬀset by a surge in an-
gry American ones. After dates were ﬁnal-
ised for a women’s march to protest Mr
Trump’s inauguration, hotel bookings
spiked. Elliott Ferguson, head of the city’s
tourism group, expects a similar surge for
this year’s Pride Parade, on June 10th. 7

56 Business

The Economist Apr il 22nd 2017

Fast food in Japan

Feeling
sandwiched

T O K Y O

Burger and buckwheat-noodle joints
alike are searching for extra sizzle
SHIMMERING spreads of raw ﬁsh sashi-
mi, succulent beef from massaged cows,
and, for a decade, the capital with the most
Michelin-starred restaurants: few nations
rival Japan for ﬁne dining. Its fast-food
scene has also thrived for centuries. From
the 1700s bowls of cold soba noodles,
made from buckwheat, were cycled to
wealthy clients on towering trays. Sushi
began to glide past customers in 1958,
when the ﬁrst conveyor belt was installed.
In 1970 its ﬁrst homegrown hamburger
chain opened, a year before McDonald’s
entered the market.
Fast-food chains continued to be a rare
bright spot for Japan during its two-de-
cade-long economic slump. Since 2008 the
size of the market has increased from
$35bn to $45bn (those ﬁgures include con-
venience stores, or konbini); that of restau-
rants has declined every year in that per-
iod. But fast food is now being squeezed:
by a combination of higher wages and still-
tepid consumption, and by foreign rivals
winning over more Japanese stomachs. 
Tomoaki Ikeda, president of Yudetaro, a
soba chain in the greater Tokyo metropoli-
tan area, says that after a decade of budget
dining, Japanese expect everyday food to
be cheap. Once, plumping for their cheap-
est bowl of noodles, priced at ¥320 ($3),
was considered a little shameful, he says;
now it is their best-selling dish. It is having
to pay staﬀ more: a wage increase last year 

1

Three-star ser vice

Recreational vehicles

On the road 

N EW Y O R K

An all-American product ﬁnds new takers 
EARLY spring is the main selling season
for recreational vehicles (RVs) and the
phone on Tom Troiano’s desk has been
ringing incessantly. The owner of Con-
tinental RV, a dealership in Farmingdale,
a village on Long Island, Mr Troiano is on
track to sell more RVs this year than in
any other since the early 2000s. Buoyed
by cheap ﬁnancing, rising wages and
inexpensive gas, travellers are once again
splurging on big-ticket camper vans.
RVs are a quintessentially American
invention: more than two-thirds are
made in the United States. Nationally,
sales surged to 430,000 units last year, a
40-year high. At the inexpensive end they
sell for as little as $5,000 for a caravan;
deluxe versions cost up to $1m and are
typically equipped with a bedroom,
kitchen and bathroom that are bigger
than in many European ﬂats. The share
prices of Thor Industries, the biggest
RV-manufacturer in America, and Win-
nebago, the third-largest, have risen by
43% and 17%, respectively, in the past year.
That is a big change. During the
2008-09 recession, notes Mr Troiano, RV
dealerships everywhere closed down,
leaving his shop among the very few left
serving the New York metropolitan area.
The current rebound is mostly owing to
the economy’s recovery, but it also
springs from the fact that new types of
customer are embracing the lifestyle.
A decade ago the average age of an
RV-owner was 49, and over 90% were
white, says Kevin Broom of the Recre-

ational Vehicle Industry Association
(RVIA), an industry body. That didn’t
bode well for the future. But stereotypes
are being dented. Anecdotal reports
suggest that ethnic minorities now make
up around a sixth of all new customers,
says Mr Broom. The fastest-growing
customer demographic is 35- to 44-year-
olds. Another boost comes from aﬄuent
immigrants, who are keen to experience
long, self-planned road trips in America.
Mr Troiano’s most recent big sale was to a
rich Asian family.
The industry hopes that its poor re-
cord with foreign sales—last year less
than 1% of RVs produced domestically
were shipped to foreign markets (exclud-
ing Canada)—may improve, too. China’s
government, for example, has pledged to
build 2,000 campgrounds by 2020, up
from an estimated 300 today, in a bid to
promote domestic tourism, particularly
to remote rural regions. Chinese ﬁrms
such as Yutong Bus make RVs, but not of
the quality that many Chinese want. The
country imported 1,000 vehicles last
year, over half of them American. 
RV manufacturers are also marketing
the notion that their motor homes can be
commercial as well as leisure vehicles.
They can allow travelling salesmen,
businessmen and university-admissions
oﬃcers to save on food and hotel costs,
for example, when they hit the road
trying to recruit prospective new clients
and students. The oﬃce, as well as home,
can be wherever you park it. 

“A true victory

   is a victory over oneself.”

SCG congratulates Pro May -Ariya Jutanugarn
SCG congratulates Pro May -Ariya Jutanugarn

Rolex Player of the Year 2016
Rolex Player of the Year 2016

58 Business

2 of 0.5% was the biggest since 2010. Yet a sur-
vey by Shinsei Bank, a lender, suggests sal-
arymen still spent on average only ¥587 on
a workday lunch last year. Yudetaro’s
healthiest options, which appeal to its
mostly middle-aged male customers, are
usually also its cheapest (like most fast-
food joints in Japan, Yudetaro lists the kilo-
calorie count for each dish).
Many in the industry fret that a hike in
Japan’s consumption, or value–added, tax,
planned for 2019, which may not apply to
food sold at konbini, will make chains even
less attractive as they try to raise prices.
Konbini oﬀer everything from cheap egg-
salad sandwiches to rice lunch-boxes that
can be reheated and eaten in-store. Accord-
ing to Euromonitor, a market-research ﬁrm,
7-Eleven, one of Japan’s three biggest kon-
bini, accounts for over a third of the fast-
food market alone by value.
To lure back customers, chains are hom-
ing in on service. Yudetaro now fries its
tempura to order at its standing stalls, often
in train stations; at outlets, it has replaced
bar counters with tables and seats. MOS
Burger, a local chain that opened in the
1970s, has sent staﬀ new quality guide-
lines, from how to slice tomatoes to the
temperature of the water in which the let-
tuce is dipped before serving (4°C).
MOS Burger’s winning recipe has been
to oﬀer healthy, localised versions of the
American hamburger: it serves, for exam-
ple, thick slices of tomato and heaps of let-
tuce in its burgers. Since 1987 it has sold a
rice-burger variant that swaps out bread
halves for seared rice cakes, and since 2004
a lettuce-burger (lettuce-for-buns). It also
lets franchisees around the country pitch
ideas for new burgers, adding a couple a
year to its nationwide menu from the few
hundred suggested (in 2016, one was a lo-
tus-root-and-chicken burger). 
Recently foreign rivals have been beef-
ing up their oﬀerings too, including MOS’s
arch-rival, Makku—McDonald’s Japan. It
had been buﬀeted by food-safety scandals,
but had its ﬁrst sales increase in 2015 after
six years of decline. Takao Shigemori, a
food analyst in Tokyo, says the American
chain—now with 3,000 outlets—has been
revamping its menu to appeal to Japanese
customers. This month it introduced three
new beef burgers, on Asian-style steamed
buns, one with teriyaki sauce.
Still, foreign ﬁrms remain laggards in
other ways, says Mr Shigemori. Since 1997
MOS Burger has displayed on boards in
each outlet the names of the farmers who
grew the lettuce or tomatoes being served
in the store that day. At Yudetaro outlets,
customers can watch the soba noodles be-
ing cut and boiled. Unlike at other chains,
the ﬁrm does not do deliveries as it did in
its early days, because it wants its noodles
always to be eaten at their very freshest. Its
hope is that this way, the company will
keep delivering. 7

Internet regulation 

Reload

America is gearing up for another
debate over network neutrality
THE details around network neutrality,
the principle that internet-service pro-
viders (ISPs) must treat all sorts of web traf-
ﬁc equally, can be mind-numbingly ab-
struse. But they fuel passion, nonetheless.
After Tom Wheeler, a former chairman of
America’s Federal Communications Com-
mission (FCC), proposed unpopular net-
neutrality rules in late 2014, for instance,
protesters blocked his driveway, forcing
him to walk to work. Their action was
meant to illustrate the threat of big ISPs
erecting toll-booths and other choke-
points that would relegate less well-oﬀ
consumers to digital slow lanes. 
Now it is the turn of Ajit Pai (pictured),
Mr Wheeler’s successor, to stir the hornets’
nest. In the coming days Mr Pai is expected
to unveil a proposal for new rules on net
neutrality. His plan is anticipated to be a
testament both to his deregulatory agenda
and to the big ISPs’ lobbying power. It
would essentially take the FCC out of the
equation when it comes to policing the
smooth running of the internet. 
Because of the protests in 2014 and be-
cause of a court decision that year suggest-
ing that the FCC needed the jurisdiction to
be able to mandate net-neutrality rules, Mr
Wheeler reclassiﬁed internet access as a
“telecommunications service” to be under
Title II of the Telecommunications Act,
meaning that ISPs are regulated as utilities.
It is this change that Mr Pai has vowed to
undo: he considers the FCC’s new domi-
nion over ISPs as regulatory overkill. 
Mr Pai does support general rules to

The Economist Apr il 22nd 2017

protect net neutrality. Like other advocates
of the principle, he credits these for the in-
ternet’s innovativeness. But he believes
that light-touch regulation is enough. Once
ISPs are no longer classed as telecommuni-
cations services he wants them to commit
to net neutrality in their terms of service.
This commitment would (in theory) be en-
forced by a diﬀerent agency, the Federal
Trade Commission (FTC), which has the
authority to go after ﬁrms if they fail to live
up to promises they make to customers.
Yet the ISPs’ commitments would, at
bottom, be voluntary, as critics such as
Chris Lewis of Public Knowledge, an advo-
cacy group, note. ISPs could refuse to make
promises on net neutrality, or abandon
them down the line. If they did break
promises, it is unclear how vigorously the
FTC would go after them. It has less exper-
tise in network engineering, for example,
so is much less well equipped to enforce
the rules. And Mr Pai may risk going too far
even for his own comfort on net neutrality.
If he reclassiﬁes internet access, he ﬁnds
himself in the same situation Mr Wheeler
was in: the FCC then has limited authority
to intervene should things go wrong.
The logical answer to this legal conun-
drum would be for Congress to add a stat-
ute on net neutrality to the Telecommuni-
cations Act, which predates the rise of the
internet. That is unlikely, given other legis-
lative priorities such as health care and cor-
porate tax, but in a less partisan universe,
Republicans and Democrats would have
little problem ﬁnding common ground on
the subject, says Kevin Werbach of Whar-
ton, a business school at the University of
Pennsylvania. 
Such a compromise would also be in
tune with how the debate about net neu-
trality has evolved. Although they oppose
internet access being regulated under Title
II, most ISPs, including big ones such as
AT&T and Verizon, have made their peace
with net neutrality. The current rules have
had no discernible negative impact on the
companies, notes Mr Werbach. Invest-
ment in broadband networks may have
fallen, as critics of the strict net-neutrality
rules predicted, but such swings are com-
mon in the telecoms industry and there is
no conclusive evidence that net neutrality
is to blame for the fall.
Will Mr Pai’s plans trigger widespread
protests similar to those in 2014? Mr Lewis
of Public Knowledge expects that resis-
tance will be stronger still, but others are
not so sure. Although big internet ﬁrms
such as Google, Netﬂix, Amazon and oth-
ers have come out against his expected pro-
posals, their opposition seems less deter-
mined than it was three years ago. Netﬂix,
one of the ﬁercest defenders of net neutral-
ity, says it is now big enough to stand up for
itself. Activists, for their part, may already
be weary from ﬁghting Mr Trump’s gov-
ernment on other fronts. 7

60 Business

The Economist Apr il 22nd 2017

Schumpeter

Life in the public eye

Why America should worry about the shrinking number of listed ﬁrms

T. Rowe Price, are investing in unicorns, meaning private ﬁrms
that are worth over $1bn, of which there are now roughly 100.
Airbnb exempliﬁes the trend. It is almost a decade old but un-
listed. Amazon was three years old in 1997 when it ﬂoated. Airbnb
has raised billions from private markets and has 26 external in-
vestors. It will make gross operating proﬁts of $450m this year, ac-
cording to a new book, “The Airbnb Story” by Leigh Gallagher, so
doesn’t need piles of new cash. At its fund-raising round last au-
tumn, employees were able to sell around $200m of shares,
which does away with another reason for ﬁrms to do an IPO. 
Exits from the stockmarket by established ﬁrms—the second
factor behind listed ﬁrms’ shrinking ranks—are growing in num-
ber. About a third of departures are involuntary, as companies get
too small to qualify for public markets or go bust. The rest are due
to takeovers. Some ﬁrms get bought by private-equity funds but
most get taken over by other corporations, usually listed ones.
Decades of lax antitrust enforcement mean that most industries
have grown more concentrated. Bosses and consultants often ar-
gue that takeovers are evidence that capitalism has become more
competitive. In fact it is evidence of the opposite: that more of the
economy is controlled by large ﬁrms.
Perhaps the number of listed ﬁrms will stop falling. This year
several trendy companies have ﬂoated, including Snap, a social-
media ﬁrm, and Canada Goose, a maker of expensive winter
coats beloved of Manhattanites. If the euphoria over tech ﬁrms
fades somewhat it may become harder for unicorns to raise mon-
ey privately. Continued decline in the number of listed ﬁrms
would be bad news. It would be a symptom of the oligopolisa-
tion of the economy, which will harm growth in the long run. 
Fewer listed ﬁrms also undermines the notion of shareholder
democracy. Mr Mauboussin notes that 40 years ago a pension
fund could get full exposure to the economy by owning the S&P
500 index and betting on a venture-capital fund to capture re-
turns from startups. Now a fund needs to make lots of invest-
ments in private ﬁrms and in opaque vehicles that generate fees
for bankers and advisers. Ordinary Americans without connec-
tions are meanwhile unable directly to own shares in new com-
panies that are active in the fastest-growing parts of the economy.
Unicorns don’t have to meet public-company standards on ac-
counting and disclosure, so it is expensive to monitor them prop-
erly. Some money managers don’t bother. There has already been
one blow-up among the unicorns, Theranos, a blood-testing
company whose products didn’t work. And without the close
scrutiny that comes with being public, other ﬁrms appear
trapped in a permanent adolescence of erratic management.
Uber, a transport ﬁrm that is losing money and whose boss, Tra-
vis Kalanick, is scandal-prone, is a case in point.

Time to grow up
The fact that fewer companies control the economy is a question
for antitrust regulators. Whether young ﬁrms list their shares is
entirely up to their owners. Some tech tycoons including Elon
Musk, the boss of Tesla, an electric-car company and Jeﬀ Bezos of
Amazon have mastered the art of running public ﬁrms on long-
term horizons. Mr Chesky says that Mr Bezos has pointed out to
him that a company must be “robust” to survive once it is public.
Achieving that might be seen as a chore. But it can also be an in-
centive to improve performance and corporate culture. The hope
is that Mr Chesky is up to the task, and that the next time he visits
the NYSE, he’ll be there to ring the bell. 7

LAST month Schumpeter attended an event at the New York
Stock Exchange held in honour of Brian Chesky, the co-foun-
der of Airbnb, a room-sharing website that private investors val-
ue at $31bn. Glittering tables were laid out not far from where
George Washington was inaugurated in 1789. The well-heeled
members of the Economic Club of New York watched as Thomas
Farley, the NYSE’s president, hailed Airbnb as an exemplar of
American enterprise. Mr Chesky recounted his journey from
sleeping on couches in San Francisco to being a billionaire. His
mum, a former social worker, looked on. Only one thing was
missing. When Mr Chesky was asked if he would list Airbnb on
the NYSE, he hesitated. He said there was no pressing need.
Airbnb is not alone. A big trend in American business is the
collapse in the number of listed companies. There were 7,322 in
1996; today there are 3,671. It is important not to confuse this with
a shrinking of the stockmarket: the value of listed ﬁrms has risen
from 105% of GDP in 1996 to 136% now. But a smaller number of
older, bigger ﬁrms dominate bourses. The average listed ﬁrm has
a lifespan of 18 years, up from 12 years two decades ago, and is
worth four times more. The number of companies doing initial
public oﬀerings (IPOs), meanwhile, has fallen from 300 a year on
average in the two decades to 2000 to about 100 a year since.
Many highly-valued startups, including Lyft, a ride-sharing ﬁrm,
and Pinterest, a photo-sharing site, stay private for longer.
A new paper by Michael Mauboussin, who works for Credit
Suisse, a bank, and teaches at Columbia Business School in New
York, explains why this matters. Consider the ﬁrst reason behind
the slump in the number of listed ﬁrms: the IPO drought. Al-
though the total population of companies in America has been
steady, their propensity to list their shares has roughly halved.
Fear of red tape is one reason (although the decline predates the
Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, which tightened disclosure rules
and which bosses hate). Many founders also believe that private
markets are better at allowing them a long-term perspective.
As for companies’ hunger for capital, many need less to spend
on assets such as plant and equipment as the economy becomes
more technology-intensive. Private markets, meanwhile, have
become more sophisticated at supplying the funds they do re-
quire. Many big, mainstream fund managers, such as Fidelity and

Finance and economics

The Economist Apr il 22nd 2017 61

Also in this section
62 Buttonwood: Investors and politics
63 Sugar in the EU
63 Amer ican banks report 
64 The IMF’s World Economic Outlook
65 Paying for infrastructure
66 Crossrail
67 Free exchange: Comparative
advantage

For daily analysis and debate on economics, visit
Economist.com/economics

ties, track indices, allowing investors ac-
cess to a basket of bonds. But the impact for
bonds is more signiﬁcant, because bonds
are otherwise traded so rarely. Indeed,
bond ETFs are more liquid than the assets
the funds own. But ETFs still need dealers:
the institutional investors that create and
redeem ETF shares have so far had to rely
either on voice-trading or RFQ systems.
All-to-all trading, by contrast, has the
potential to change bond-market dynam-
ics more fundamentally. Pioneered in 2012
by MarketAxess, the second-largest bond-
trading platform after Bloomberg, it allows
any user of a network to trade with anoth-
er directly, whether asset manager or deal-
er. Asset managers, who provide 39% of the
liquidity in MarketAxess’s all-to-all sys-
tem, are thus in direct competition with
dealers (who provide 29%). As Richard
Schiﬀman of MarketAxess puts it, all-to-all
makes it possible for asset managers to
move from being price-takers (having to ac-
cept dealer quotes) towards being price-
makers (setting their own prices). 

We’re all dealers now
Momentum 
is gathering as all-to-all
catches on with other platforms, too.
Smaller ones, such as Liquidnet and Tru-
mid, already oﬀer it. But Tradeweb’s an-
nouncement this month carries particular
weight because it is a sizeable force—the
third-largest in the market, thus leaving
only Bloomberg, the market leader, with
no all-to-all oﬀering as yet. At MarketAx-
ess, the new system already represents 16%
of trading volume in American invest-
ment-grade corporate bonds, and fully 34%
of that in American high-yield bonds.
Some argue that even all-to-all systems,
let alone RFQ, do not tackle one big diﬃcul-

1

Corporate-bond markets

Click to trade

Corporate-bond markets are being revamped by digitisation
JUST a few decades ago, an asset manager
standing globally, and over $1.5trn-worth
wanting to trade shares, bonds or deriva-
issued last year in America alone. But cor-
tives almost always had to call up the
porate bonds vary in maturity, issue date
trading desk at a big investment bank. To-
and in where they stand in the issuer’s hier-
day shares and many derivatives can be
archy of debt. Unlike, say, most sovereign
traded with a few simple clicks (or even in
debt, it is traded only rarely; 90% of all cor-
fully automated fashion, using algo-
porate bonds change hands fewer than ﬁve
rithms). But buying and selling bonds, es-
times a year. The shares of a company, by
pecially corporate bonds, is still an old-
contrast, usually come in at most two types
fashioned business. Over four-ﬁfths of
(common and preferred), and are traded
trading in American corporate bonds still
frequently on centralised exchanges. 
takes place with a dealer, usually over the
The traditional way of matching buyers
phone. Yet digitisation is at last beginning
and sellers has been for dealers to take on
to change the structure of bond markets:
the risk. They name a price, buy bonds and
witness the announcement on April 11th
hold them in their inventory until a buyer
by Tradeweb, an electronic-trading plat-
emerges. This explains why personal rela-
form, that it is to oﬀer “all-to-all” trading in
tionships still matter so much in the bond
European corporate bonds, ie, a system in
market. The model is deeply entrenched:
which any market participant can trade
even most electronic platforms have
with any other. 
adopted it, in the form of “request for
quote” (RFQ) systems, where dealers have
Electronic bond-trading is not in itself
new. Tradeweb’s platform, initially limited
the exclusive right to quote prices. But
to trading of American Treasuries, was un-
when dealers are unwilling to hold onto
veiled in 1998. Around half of Treasuries,
bonds, as many have been since the ﬁnan-
and nearly 60% of European government
cial crisis, because of tighter capital re-
bonds, are now traded electronically, reck-
quirements, then such systems oﬀer no
ons Greenwich Associates, a consultancy.
more help than phone trading. Some
But for corporate bonds, progress has been
bonds trade so rarely that a sell- or buy-
slower: only 25% of global trading volume
query may elicit no responses at all.
in investment-grade bonds, and merely
One new source of liquidity has come
13% of that in high-yield ones, is electronic.
from exchange-traded funds (ETFs). Shares
The market is huge—with over $50trn out-
in bond ETFs, like those composed of equi-

62 Finance and economics

The Economist Apr il 22nd 2017

2 ty: that buyers and sellers are not always
present at the same time. Algomi, a bond-
market data ﬁrm, seeks to match buyers
and sellers across time. Its interface for
dealers allows traders easily to keep track
of inquiries into a particular bond; it also
suggests similar bonds if that one is not
available. For investors, the company pro-
vides data on trading activity in particular
bonds. And for trades where a dealer can-
not match buyers and sellers, it has, in part-
nership with Euronext, an exchange pro-
vider, set up a trading venue for corporate
bonds that will link up dealers in its net-
work. So dealers should be able to gradu-

ate from risk-taking to matchmaking.
Another factor that will change the
structure of the bond market is regulation.
From January 2018 MiFID 2, a wide-ranging
European ﬁnancial-market regulation, will
require market participants to report the
prices and approximate volumes of all
completed bond transactions—an unprec-
edented level of detail (earlier American
rules required more limited price disclo-
sure). Such transparency is expected to
weaken dealers’ market power. The sheer
complexity of this undertaking will also
push more trading onto electronic plat-
forms, which are busy embedding auto-

matic reporting. 
Amid all this change are tantalising
hints of another potentially transforma-
tive trend: full automation. Tradeweb has
already introduced a number of protocols
that allow the preprogramming of a series
of trades: eg, selling one bond and buying
another with the proceeds; or arranging
currency hedging. MarketAxess has even
seen expressions of interest from hedge
funds wishing to trade bonds using algo-
rithms. Such moves have brought a lot
more liquidity (and volatility) to other
markets. In the sleepier world of corporate
bonds, the impact could be far-reaching. 7

Buttonwood

Voting with their wallets

Investors don’t always like democracy
THE VICTORY of Recep Tayyip Erdo-
gan, Turkey’s president, in a referen-
dum on April 16th is seen by many ob-
servers as a worrying step on the road to
autocracy. The vote handed Mr Erdogan
far-reaching new powers. But the Turkish
lira, government bonds and stockmarket
all gained ground as the results came in. 
It was a reminder that the relationship
between markets and democracy is not
rock-solid. Like an errant husband, inves-
tors may proclaim their ﬁdelity to democ-
racy but are not averse to seeing someone
else on the side.
In Turkey investors may have feared
turmoil if Mr Erdogan’s proposal had
been defeated. It is an old, but fairly reli-
able, rule that investors dislike uncertain-
ty. And the early years of Mr Erdogan’s
tenure, when he was seen as a liberalising
democrat, saw rapid economic growth;
his transformation into an emerging auto-
crat has not put investors oﬀ. Since he
took oﬃce, the Istanbul market has
gained 760% (see chart). 
An authoritarian government can pro-
vide certainty, at least in the short term. In
1922, when Mussolini took power in Italy,
its equity market returned 29% and its gov-
ernment bonds 18%, according to Mike
Staunton of the London Business School.
Hitler’s accession in 1933 saw German
shares return 14% and bonds 15%. True,
Wall Street did even better that year under
Franklin Roosevelt but still—even then,
Hitler was clearly a dangerous extremist. 
The world’s most developed econo-
mies tend to be democracies, and to be
more open to trade and foreign invest-
ment. But as China has demonstrated, it is
certainly possible to generate rapid eco-
nomic growth without a democratic sys-
tem. China’s stockmarket (along with
Hong Kong’s) has been among the best-
performing bourses this millennium. 

Go back in time 100 years and investors
would have been pretty suspicious of
democratic governments. The pre-1914
world was dominated by governments
with restricted voter franchises, in which
currencies were tied to the gold standard,
in part to protect the creditor classes from
the ravages of inﬂation. The arrival of mass
democracy after 1918 was followed by a
boom in the 1920s but then by the Depres-
sion, stockmarket collapse and abandon-
ment of the gold standard.
Democracies can enact policies that are
not market-friendly; the interests of ordin-
ary voters and international investors are
not always aligned. If voters support trade
tariﬀs, nationalisation or higher taxes on
ﬁrms and top earners, then both stock-
markets and currencies are likely to suﬀer.
The great bull market of the 1980s and
1990s, on the other hand, coincided with
political moves to reduce regulations, low-
er taxes and let capital ﬂow freely across
borders. After the fall of the Berlin Wall,
many former Communist countries priva-
tised state-owned companies and opened
domestic stockmarkets. In many countries,
investors could be relatively relaxed about

Investors’ delight

Borsa Istanbul 100 index

Mar 14th 2003=100

1,000

800

600

400

200
100
0

2003 05

07

09

11

13

15 17

Source: Thomson Reuters

which party took oﬃce; economic re-
forms were pushed through by Bill Clin-
ton, Gerhard Schröder and Tony Blair, all
politicians from the centre-left.
But
the background has changed
again. There are remarkable similarities
between the election in America and the
referendums in Britain and Turkey. In all
three, the electorate was bitterly divided
and the margin of victory was narrow
(Donald Trump lost the popular vote but
won the electoral college). In all three, the
victorious side drew its support from ru-
ral areas and small towns, and was op-
posed by voters in the big cities. And in all
three cases, it has ignored the narrowness
of the majority and has argued it has a
mandate for radical policy change. 
Democracies work best when there is
a modicum of consensus and voters are
willing to accept defeat for their own side
as legitimate. But that is harder when the
ideological divisions are sharp and elec-
toral systems produce “winner takes all”
results. In France, for example, voters may
yet be faced with a choice in the second
round between a candidate from the ex-
treme right and one from the extreme left.
This is likely to result in more radical
political changes, of the type that markets
do ﬁnd unsettling. The general drift is to-
wards more authoritarian, more national-
istic policies that appeal to voters whose
living standards have stagnated. That pro-
cess
can create a chain 
reaction;
nationalist policies in one country can
provoke an adverse reaction in its neigh-
bours and trading partners. Investors
may believe that some of these authori-
tarian leaders will deliver policies they
like in the short run—tax cuts, for exam-
ple. But in the long run, this is a develop-
ment that ought to concern them greatly.

Economist.com/blogs/buttonwood

The Economist Apr il 22nd 2017 

Sugar in the EU

A sweet deal

The EU is liberalising its sugar regime,
but its beet producers retain the edge 
IN A rickety warehouse on the banks of
London’s Thames sit mountains of cara-
mel-coloured raw cane-sugar. For centu-
ries the sweet stuﬀ has come across the
seas to Tate & Lyle Sugars’ dockside factory,
to be reﬁned into the white stuﬀ. Cane ac-
counts for four-ﬁfths of global sugar pro-
duction, but only one-ﬁfth of Europe’s.
Most of the continent’s sugar is made from
beet, thanks to a technique developed in
the Napoleonic wars, when an English
blockade hit French cane-sugar imports. 
No surprise, then, that the sugar-beet in-
dustry has been well guarded by Europe’s
Common Agricultural Policy. But in recent
years the EU has reformed its system of
quotas and subsidies to lower food prices
and enhance its farmers’ competitiveness;
production quotas for milk were disman-
tled in 2015, for example. Now it is sugar’s
turn. From October this year, the EU will
abolish its minimum price and production
quota for beet. Its complex restrictions on
sugar imports will remain, however, as
will its income support for farmers. 
The beet sector has already been re-
structured in anticipation. EU compensa-
tion schemes have facilitated the closure of
factories and a decline in the number of
beet growers propped up by state support.
Thanks to improved seeding technology,
beet yields have been rising, says Kona
Haque from ED&F Man, a commodities-
trading house. This is particularly true of
the “beet belt”, which runs through parts
of Britain, France and Germany. Ms Haque
expects production to rise by over 17% this
year, barring unfavourable weather. 
The abolition of support for beet also
means that the EU may well become a net
exporter of sugar for the ﬁrst time in over
ten years. (Once processed, sugar from
beet is indistinguishable from white cane-
sugar.) A cap on exports was imposed in
2005, when the World Trade Organisation
ruled in favour of a complaint from Brazil,
Australia and Thailand that EU support
gave its exports an unfair advantage. Re-
ﬁned white-sugar exports could nearly
double to 2.6m tonnes a year once support
is removed, says Claudiu Covrig from S&P
Global Platts, a provider of commodity-
market information. But they are unlikely
to return soon to the peak of 7m tonnes
seen before the WTO ruling, since that
would require big investment in export in-
frastructure. European exporters will face
more competition, too: former customers
in places such as the Middle East and

Finance and economics 63

Can cane be beet?

northern Africa set up their own cane-sug-
ar reﬁneries when EU exports dried up. 
How much production and exports in-
crease will depend on world prices. As the
beet industry restructured, the EU sugar
price fell from more than €700 ($742) a
tonne in 2013 to around €500 in early 2017,
close to the world sugar price. As the sector
becomes less protected, it seems likely that
Europe’s prices will more closely track the
volatile world sugar price. That could aﬀect
farmers’ decisions to grow beet. Sharp
price falls would deter them from sowing
beet altogether.
The deregulation does not mean that
cane and beet are on an even footing in Eu-
rope, says Gerald Mason at Tate & Lyle Sug-
ars. Cane continues to be hamstrung by
import restrictions. A system of tariﬀs and
quotas makes trade with the most eﬃcient
low-cost producers, such as Brazil and Mex-
ico, prohibitively expensive. 
African, Caribbean and Paciﬁc cane
producers will continue to receive prefer-
ential access to the European market. But
many are ineﬃcient, high-cost producers
and are uncompetitive now that European
sugar prices have fallen. The solution is for
them to diversify. Some countries will
cope better than others. Mauritius and Be-
lize, for example, are using cane to produce
speciality sugars, ethanol and electricity.
African producers, such as Zambia and
Malawi, could export to regional markets.
But a recent report for the European Com-
mission found that some Caribbean pro-
ducers such as Guyana and Jamaica have
diversiﬁed little, even though exports to
Europe are expected to fall drastically, 
Nine EU members have cane reﬁneries,
which will ﬁnd their margins squeezed as
white-sugar prices fall but imported raw-
sugar costs stay high. Tate & Lyle Sugars ran
a €25m loss in the year to September 2015,
for which it blames import restrictions.

This is why the company came out in fa-
vour of a British departure from the EU: Mr
Mason views Brexit as a “golden opportu-
nity” to establish rules that treat cane and
beet as equals in the British market. Beet
producers have a diﬀerent notion of fair-
ness: for them, a level playing-ﬁeld is one
that takes into account the state support
other producers receive. Precisely how the
British government will keep both sides
sweet is anyone’s guess. 7

Amer ican banks

Happy returns

After an encouraging ﬁrst quarter,
questions over regulation remain
WHAT a diﬀerence a year makes.
When America’s big banks reported
ﬁrst-quarter earnings for 2016, the mood
was glum. The Federal Reserve was prov-
ing tardier than hoped in raising interest
rates, which held down lending margins.
Jitters about the world economy meant rot-
ten results for investment-banking units, in
what is usually their best season of the
year. Regulators added to the misery: last
April the Fed rejected the “living wills”—
plans for liquidating lenders that get into
trouble—of ﬁve of the six largest banks.
This spring bankers are happier. Busi-
ness perked up last year after that dismal
start. Donald Trump’s election in Novem-
ber, accompanied by promises to ginger up
the American economy, cut corporate tax-
es and roll back regulation of ﬁnance, gave
banks’ shares a lift (see chart on next page).
The Fed raised rates in December and
again in March and is likely to keep increas-

1

64 Finance and economics

The Economist Apr il 22nd 2017

Streetwise

United States, banks’ share pr ices

Januar y 1st 2016=100

Bank of Amer ica

Morgan Stanley

Goldman Sachs

JPMorgan Chase

Citigroup

Wells Fargo

2016

2017

Source: Thomson Reuters

160

140

120

100

80

60

2

ing them. And 2017’s ﬁrst-quarter results
have, mostly, seen an improvement—
though the cheer was not evenly shared.
“Wall Street activities have performed
better than Main Street ones,” says Mike
Mayo, an independent bank analyst. Rev-
enues from capital-market businesses at
the ﬁve biggest Wall Street ﬁrms, Mr Mayo
calculates, rose by an average of one-ﬁfth
in the ﬁrst quarter of the year, compared
with a year earlier.
Underwriting and ﬁxed-income trad-
ing were buoyant; equity trading and ad-
vice were ﬂattish. Morgan Stanley, the last
big bank to report, was arguably the star
turn. On April 19th it said its ﬁxed-income
revenues had almost doubled, to $1.7bn,
apparently vindicating a thorough over-
haul of the division early last year. The
ﬁrm’s net income rose by 70%, to $1.9bn.
The previous day Goldman Sachs had
disappointed analysts, although its net in-
come was twice as high as a year before. Its
ﬁxed-income, currency and commodities
revenues were ﬂat, also at $1.7bn. It also
lagged behind the ﬁeld in equities. Volatil-
ity in the foreign-exchange, crude-oil and
equity markets was subdued: hedge funds
(on which Goldman’s trading business is
more reliant than its rivals) were conse-
quently less active. Even so, admitted
Goldman’s Martin Chavez, “we didn’t
navigate the market well”.
Business on Main Street was more slug-
gish. Bank loans grew in the ﬁrst quarter by
just 0.7% at an annualised rate, according to
the Fed, the slowest for almost six years.
Commercial and industrial lending shrank
for the ﬁrst time since late 2010. Residen-
tial-mortgage lending also declined. But
widening interest margins helped some
banks, as loan rates went up faster than
funding costs: Bank of America’s spread
rose by 18 basis points from the previous
quarter and JPMorgan Chase’s by ten.
In such a quarter Wells Fargo, the least
dependent of the big six on investment
banking, was perhaps the least likely to
shine. Its net income, at $5.5bn, was virtual-
ly unchanged from a year before and a
shade up from the fourth quarter. A quar-

World Economic Outlook

Hope springs

optimistic in the past three years.
Christine Lagarde, the IMF’s boss,
recently conceded that economic growth
in the past six years has been “disap-
pointing”, but held ﬁrm in her belief that
the world economy was turning. Hence
the positive revision to its global GDP
forecast—albeit by just a tenth of a per-
centage point.
The global economy may still falter
for a number of reasons. Ms Lagarde
worries the rich world will suﬀer “self-
inﬂicted wounds” from poor policy
choices, notably on trade. Political uncer-
tainty abounds. Just hours before the IMF
released the WEO came the surprising
news of an imminent election in Britain.
The known unknowns hardly help,
either. Mr Trump’s ﬁscal policies, for
example, are far from ﬁrm plans—Mau-
rice Obstfeld, the IMF’s chief economist,
calls them “a work in progress”. 

The IMF believes that economic growth is picking up. Sound familiar?
APRIL is the cruellest month, breeding
lilacs out of the dead land, and, in
Washington, chirpy forecasts from the
IMF that often prove a bit too chirpy. On
April 18th the fund released its semi-
annual World Economic Outlook (WEO),
raising its forecast for global growth in
2017 to 3.5%.
Growth forecasts for the emerging
world have not changed. The IMF’s glo-
bal optimism is based instead on hopes
of increased growth in the rich world.
The fund takes a rosy view of the Ameri-
can economy, citing both high levels of
consumer conﬁdence and Donald
Trump’s plans for more government
spending. In Britain the IMF now reckons
GDP will grow by 2.0% in 2017, up from
earlier estimates of 1.5% (issued in Janu-
ary) and 1.1% (last October). The IMF has
also raised its forecasts for Japan and the
euro area.
Snipers point out that IMF forecasts
have been far from perfect. Some glitches
are excusable. In the spring of 1990, it
predicted that Kuwait’s economy would
grow by 0.8% that year. It actually fell by
26%. The IMF’s model did not allow for
an Iraqi invasion. But other errors are less
easily explained: between 1990 and 2007,
the IMF’s spring forecasts underestimat-
ed global growth in 13 of the 18 years, in
large part because it failed to foresee the
spectacular rise of China.
Since the ﬁnancial crisis, however, the
IMF has had to revise down its forecasts
over time every year since 2010 (see
chart). The fund’s spring forecasts for the
coming year have turned out to be over-

5.0

4.5

4.0

3.5

3.0

17

World GDP, % increase on a year earlier
IMF forecasts for: 
2011
2014

2016

Not so great expectations

Date forecast made

2015

2017

2006

08

10

2012

2013

Actual

12

14

Source: IMF

terly increase in commercial lending was
outweighed by a decline in consumer
loans, mainly mortgages.
But Wells has other worries. It is still re-
covering from last September’s revelation
that it had opened more than 2m ghost ac-
counts. It hopes that a scathing report this
month by outside consultants, the dismiss-
al of several executives and the clawing
back from them of $180m in pay and shares
will help it to recover customers’ trust. It
has some way to go: the number of current
(checking) accounts opened in March was
up by 7% from February, but 35% lower
than a year before. Institutional Share-
holder Services, a ﬁrm which advises in-
vestors, has recommended voting to re-
place most of Wells’s board at the annual
meeting on April 25th.
Wells’s woes notwithstanding, banks
ought to be able to look ahead in good

heart. Rates are likely to rise further, Ameri-
ca’s economy is in good shape and Wall
Street ﬁrms stand to gain as Europe picks
up too. But a cheerful year is by no means
assured. Mr Trump’s tax-cutting plans are
not yet formed and the future of bank regu-
lation is still unclear. Hence the stalling, in
recent weeks, of the rally in banks’ shares.
Bankers have argued that it is high time
red tape was cut: lending, they say, is being
held back. Mr Trump is due to appoint sev-
eral regulators who may lift their burden.
But his chief economic adviser, Gary Cohn,
formerly at Goldman Sachs, has mused
vaguely about a “21st-century version” of
the Glass-Steagall act, the Depression-era
law that separated commercial and invest-
ment banking, repealed only in 1999. With
no details, bank bosses were coy in earn-
ings calls with analysts, but “Glass” and
“Steagall” are not soothing words. 7

The Economist Apr il 22nd 2017 

Finance and economics 65

al. Asset managers, such as the Ottawa
Teachers Pension Fund, have built up
know-how in infrastructure investment.
Others put money to work through spe-
cialist fund managers, such as IFM. These
have raised more than $260bn over the
past decade, including $47bn last year (see
chart on next page). 
PPP thus promises to deal with a host of
shortages: of infrastructure; of ﬁscal space;
of long-lived and safe securities; and of ag-
gregate demand and jobs. If it is done cor-
rectly, the public users of infrastructure
gain from the innovation and eﬃciency of
private-sector ﬁrms. But the shortish his-
tory of PPP is littered with examples where
private provision did not live up to its
promises. Problems fall broadly into three
categories: the behavioural barriers that
turn oﬀ consumers; political interests that
often turn projects sour; and the diﬃculty
of ﬁnding ﬁnancial and incentive struc-
tures that align the interests of all parties. 
Start with public opposition. Anxieties
about privatising essential services are pre-
sent in all countries but tellingly are not al-
ways consistent. Britain seems fairly re-
laxed about private water companies but is
cool on privately run toll roads. In contrast,
private toll roads are a feature of Australian
life but water privatisation remains contro-
versial. A lot depends on what the public
has become used to. It is typically more
comfortable with the private ownership of
telecoms and electricity assets, which is es-
tablished, than with highways. Yet cable
and power networks are at least as critical
as roads, perhaps more so. 
Whatever the logic, a touchy public
makes for jumpy politicians. A change of
administration can often kill a project or
drain public support for it. For instance, last
year legislators in North Carolina voted
down a PPP toll-road project agreed in 2014.
It is now under independent review. The 

1

Building blocks

Annual infrastructure spending

2008-13, % of GDP

0

2

4

6

8

10

China
India
South Afr ica
Australia
Japan
Canada
Indonesia
Mexico
Brazil
Italy
United States
Br itain
France
Germany

3.3

-0.5

-1.2

1.2

1.5

nil

-1.3

-1.1

-0.7

0.1

-0.7

-0.4

0.1

-0.4

Surplus/shortfall
relative to
estimated needs
2016-30

Source: McKinsey Global Institute

Paying for infrastructure

Private matters

How and when to use private capital in infrastructure projects
WHEN the Indiana Toll Road was
opened in 1956, there were eight pairs
of travel plazas, or rest stops, along the 156-
mile (250km) stretch linking Chicago to
Ohio and points eastward. As cars became
faster and less thirsty, travellers had less
reason to stop regularly for petrol or
snacks. Three of the travel plazas closed in
the 1970s. Restaurants shuttered, even if of-
fered free rent. The remaining plazas,
dwindling in number, fell into disrepair.
The abiding memory some road users had
of Indiana was of grubby toilets along the
toll road.
Those rest-stops are at last getting a
makeover. IFM, an Australian infrastruc-
ture fund, is investing $34m in the toll-
road’s plazas, part of a $200m-plus up-
grade. Half of the road’s length, with 57
bridges, is being resurfaced, using a treat-
ment known as “crack-and-feed”, which
lasts longer than simply patching the top.
IFM, which acquired a 66-year lease on the
road in a $5.8bn deal in 2015, says a private-
sector operator has the right incentives to
invest for the long term. Fewer tyre blow-
outs mean less gridlock, more road users
and more revenue. 
Politicians across the spectrum agree on
the need to upgrade America’s crumbling
roads and bridges. President Donald
Trump has promised a $1trn infrastructure
package. His commerce secretary, Wilbur
Ross, is keen to involve the private sector.

His vice-president, Mike Pence, was gover-
nor of Indiana when the toll-road upgrade
was announced. It was not a smooth ride.
The 2006 legislation to sell the road barely
passed: concerns had been raised that a
private owner would cut corners on main-
tenance and service. Then a plan to levy
tolls on a new road built with the privatisa-
tion proceeds failed. The debt-heavy con-
sortium which ﬁrst acquired the Indiana
toll road went bust (IFM subsequently
bought it). The tale shows the promise of
private-public partnership, or PPP, in infra-
structure—but also the perils. 
Linking public-sector need with priv-
ate-sector capital ought to be a perfect
match. Around $2.5trn is spent worldwide
each year on roads, railways, ports, sewers,
telecoms systems and other infrastructure,
but that is still short of the roughly $3.3trn
required each year from now until 2030,
according to McKinsey Global Institute, a
think-tank. The average national shortfall
is 0.4% of GDP (see chart). When public ﬁ-
nances start to creak, capital spending is of-
ten the ﬁrst thing to go. 
Meanwhile, the pitiful yields on gov-
ernment bonds, plus longer lifespans,
mean pension funds are desperate for fair-
ly safe assets that oﬀer a stable, inﬂation-
plus return to provide the income they
have promised to the retired. The steady,
fee-based revenue generated by airports,
toll roads, seaports and utilities seems ide-

66 Finance and economics

The Economist Apr il 22nd 2017

2 East-West link, a PPP toll way in Mel-
bourne, Australia, was cancelled after pub-
lic opposition. Politicians’ desire for quick
results is also at odds with the detailed
preparation and long gestation period
needed for good infrastructure projects.
“Everyone wants to cut the ribbon,” says
Kyle Mangini of IFM. “But the political cy-
cle is four to ﬁve years while the infrastruc-
ture cycle is ﬁve to ten years.” Public sup-
port
for private 
infrastructure can,
however, be built up. Industry experts rave
about the “Australian model”, for instance,
in which proceeds from privatisations of
ports and roads go towards new hospitals,
schools and so on. 
That leaves the third substantial diﬃ-
culty, of getting the ﬁnancial structure of
PPP deals right, so that taxpayers, politi-
cians, banks and fund managers are all
content. The ﬁrst need is to work out
whether, and how, private capital will pro-
vide beneﬁts that public ﬁnance cannot.
Too often, the main reason for a govern-
ment to bring in private capital is a bad one:
to follow ﬁscal rules that cap public bor-
rowing or debt. “If the starting-point is to
keep a commitment oﬀ the public-sector
balance-sheet, it’s hard to negotiate a good
deal,” says Andy Rose of the Global Infra-
structure Investor Association. 
The right way is to allocate risk where it
can best be managed. Governments can
borrow cheaply. The cost of private capital
is higher. Commercial incentives often
make private companies better at pushing
construction and operating costs down
while keeping users happy with the ser-
vice. PPP typically works best when there
is a stream of revenue from fees, road tolls,
airport charges or utility bills. It works less
well where returns need to be enhanced
by a public subsidy, the terms of which are
liable to change. And it works badly wher-
ever there are risks that private capital can-
not gauge or reasonably bear, such as cost
overruns due to delays in regulatory clear-
ance or to “tail risks” which the state sim-
ply cannot lay oﬀ, such as nuclear decom-
missioning. Politicians might see PPP as a
way of pushing all risks onto private con-
tractors. But the wise ones shun such deals. 

Projects needed

Global infrastructure investment funds

Aggregate value, $bn

50

40

30

20

10

0

*Q1

2006

08

10

12

14

16 17*

Source: InfraDeals

Crossrail

The skeleton crew

Lessons on risk management from Europe’s biggest infrastructure project
THE eastbound platform on the Eliza-
beth line at Farringdon Station in
central London is 30 metres below
ground. Its length is as striking as its
depth. At more than 200 metres, it is
almost twice as long as the typical plat-
form on the Tube. When service begins in
December 2018, it will increase rail capac-
ity in central London by 10%, thanks to
the longer trains. Travellers nearest to the
terminal stations at Reading and Heath-
row, to the west of the city, and Shenﬁeld
and Abbey Wood, to the east, have a shot
at the acme of commuter luxury: a seat.
Crossrail, as the £14.8bn ($19bn) infra-
structure project is known, is on track to
deliver other small miracles. With 85% of
the work completed, the project is on-
budget and on-time, in spite of its size
and complexity. The programme re-
quired ten new stations, some with
passenger tunnels linking them to exist-
ing Tube lines. The Elizabeth line itself
will snake through 13 miles (21km) of
twinned tunnels, including a section
under the Thames. Tunnelling is a risky
business. You never can tell if you’ll run
into a hold-up. The Crossrail dig has
yielded 10,000 items of interest to ar-
chaeologists. At Farringdon the diggers
found 25 skeletons, the remains of vic-
tims of the 14th-century Black Death. But
there were no immovable objects.
In fact, big surprises were rare. For a
project this complex, a lot of preparation

(“de-risking” in the jargon) is needed
before private contractors can be conﬁ-
dent they won’t encounter big obstacles,
and can price a bid sensibly. Once con-
tracts were awarded, it was up to project
managers to keep to the timetable. Unex-
pected delays, such as slow delivery of
ﬁttings, are managed in three ways, says
Mujahid Khalid, who is in charge at
Farringdon. A “ﬂoat” of unallocated time
can be drawn upon; other tasks can be
brought forward; and, as a last resort, the
number of shifts can be increased. 
The ground has to be prepared for the
six ﬂoors of oﬃces and shops to be built
over the new station. Such “over-site”
developments are part of the project’s
ﬁnancing. Indeed London’s businesses
are stumping up £4.1bn in a variety of
ways for Crossrail. With hindsight, the
sponsors might have considered charging
for tours of the Farringdon site by visitors
from cities seeking lessons for their own
metro systems. 
It would not be the only unorthodox
initiative. The tunnels needed eight
bespoke boring machines. Four dug their
way back to surface and were sold back
to Herrenknecht, the German manufac-
turer. Four (two running eastward and
two westward) reached the ends of their
lines beneath Farringdon. Stripped of
valuable kit for recycling, the remains
were left there: strange skeletons for
28th-century archaeologists to pore over.

There is a spectrum of procurement op-
tions. At one end are projects ﬁnanced
from taxes. For instance, last year Los Ange-
les voted to raise its local sales tax by 0.5%
to pay for infrastructure. At the other end
are private projects, such as London Gate-
way, a deepwater port on the Thames built
by DP World, a Dubai-based port operator.
In between lie privatised utilities that are
subject to public regulation; or concessions
where a private operator is asked to build,
say, a hospital or airport terminal and then
operate or manage it for a ﬁxed period in
return for the revenue it generates or an
agreed fee. Crossrail, a massive project in
London (pictured on previous page), is an
example of another sort of hybrid, where
the asset is built by the private sector, but
ownership remains public (see box). The
right procurement model depends on the
individual project, says Mr Rose. Ultimate-
ly, however, the taxpayer pays, whether in
taxes, fares, tolls or bills.
The PPP model, though more estab-
lished in Australia, Britain and Canada, is

slowly gaining adherents in America. One
example is the new terminal at La Guardia
airport in New York. Will Mr Trump’s infra-
structure plans give PPP a big push? The
only speciﬁc detail that seems to be agreed
on is a tax credit for equity investors. But a
shortfall of private capital is not the main
bottleneck, says the head of the PPP infra-
structure business at a big construction
ﬁrm. Rather, pots of money are chasing a
paucity of projects that are ready and ﬁt for
private-sector participation. 
A lot of groundwork, such as environ-
mental studies and detailed risk-assess-
ments, are needed before a private com-
pany will bid on a project. One reason
Canada and Australia have a good record
on infrastructure is that they have agencies
dedicated to grooming projects. It is far
harder to get projects going in America,
where contractors must deal with a pletho-
ra of regulators in diﬀerent departments,
both federal and local. Streamlining plan-
ning and permits is painstaking work.
Does Mr Trump have the patience for it? 7

The Economist Apr il 22nd 2017 

Finance and economics 67

Free exchange

Donaldson’s diﬃcult idea

The law of comparative advantage at 200: still winning prizes

An isolated community has to do everything for itself. It must
grow whatever cotton it wants, however poorly suited the local
land and climate. But, as it comes into contact with other places, it
can stop doing the things it is especially bad at relative to people
elsewhere. Instead, it can focus on things where it is comparative-
ly more productive, and trade some of what it is good at making
for whatever else it needs. This process can make everyone better
oﬀ, even when one community is worse at doing everything than
its trading partners. By specialising in the task at which it is least
bad, the unlucky community frees other places to focus on what
they are best at. Through trade everyone can obtain more of
everything than they could produce for themselves. 
Economists labour to explain comparative advantage—“Ricar-
do’s diﬃcult idea”, as Paul Krugman, an American economist,
once put it. They often use simpliﬁed examples, such as the class-
room staple of a desert island with only two inhabitants, who
can either both gather coconuts and ﬁsh or specialise in one pur-
suit and then trade. Ricardo himself used an example with just
two goods: English cloth and Portuguese wine. 
Mr Donaldson, in another paper, written with Arnaud Costi-
not of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, is more ambi-
tious. At a very ﬁne level of geographic detail, the UN’s Food and
Agriculture Organisation produces estimates of how productive
diﬀerent kinds of land are at producing diﬀerent crops. That al-
lows the authors to work out patterns of comparative advantage
in agriculture across American counties. Using historical data on
what counties produced and when, and on wholesale crop
prices, the authors calculate the beneﬁts of economic integration.
They are big. Between 1880 and 1920, for instance, their work sug-
gests that integration lifted real output per worker by 79%. Be-
tween 1880 and 1997, integration added as much to American ag-
ricultural output as did growth in its productivity.
After two centuries, the theory of comparative advantage can
seem lacking in relevance. It relies on bedrock economic assump-
tions, like ﬂexible labour markets, which look increasingly ques-
tionable. Economists have theoretical windows other than com-
parative advantage through which to examine trade. And most
people are no longer engaged in the production of basic com-
modities; trade increasingly involves parts and components rath-
er than ﬁnished goods. The age in which one person weaves cloth
and the other makes wine is long past.

All together now
Yet Mr Donaldson’s work is a refreshing reminder of important
truths. Trade is not just something countries do, but is the product
of increased interaction between communities of all sorts: be
they American counties or Indian provinces or neighbourhoods
in a great metropolis. Expanding the possibilities for trade need
not take messy corporatist agreements; new technologies can do
it, too. Investments—in railways, say, or shared industrial stan-
dards or new housing in big cities—that lower barriers to trade in-
crease the size of the market within which exchanges take place. 
Finally, the promise of expanded trade is that people can stop
doing things at which they are comparatively hopeless: sparing
them frustration or indeed privation. Markets cannot always de-
liver this possibility on their own, any more than India’s railways
were the work of an invisible hand. But they have a (comparative)
advantage over isolationism. 7

Economist.com/blogs/freeexchange

IN 1853 the government of India, then directed by Britain’s East
India Company, began construction of a vast rail network, con-
tinued by the British Raj, established in 1858. At the time, most in-
land transport in India was hauled by draught animals: with carts
where roads existed and were passable; packed on animals’
backs when they were not, which was often. Moving goods
across the great expanse of the subcontinent was costly and pain-
fully slow. That changed with the arrival of the railway. Between
1853 and 1930 more than 67,000km (42,000 miles) of rail was laid
across India, providing transport that was fast, cheap and reliable.
A bullock could carry a pack 30km a day; an engine could haul
freight 600km over the rails in the same time.
Working out the impact of this took Dave Donaldson (a PhD
candidate at the London School of Economics when he started
trying) nearly a decade. He dug through mountains of yellowed
colonial-era records that had never before been collated and dig-
itised. He found that eight diﬀerent kinds of salt were sold across
India, each sourced from just one region: this quirk allowed him
to use local diﬀerences in the price of salt to calculate transport
costs. He painstakingly plotted water, road and rail routes to work
out how to ship from any place in India to any other most cheap-
ly. He found that the introduction of the railway dramatically re-
duced costs and increased trade. Connecting to it led to signiﬁcant
increases in real local annual incomes: of about 16%. That com-
pares with an increase in real income across India as a whole of
just 22% between 1870 and 1930. The railway was a big deal.
This month the American Economic Association (AEA) chose
to honour Mr Donaldson, now at Stanford University, with the
John Bates Clark medal, which is awarded annually to a leading
economist under the age of 40. He is a deserving winner: his pa-
per on the railroads of the Raj is a particular marvel. But the AEA’s
decision is particularly apt given Mr Donaldson’s focus on trade
and, more narrowly, on comparative advantage. This counter-
intuitive idea was ﬁrst set out by David Ricardo, a great British po-
litical economist, in a book published on April 19th 1817: 200 years
ago this week. It is fundamental to Ricardo’s argument that trade
is not a zero-sum aﬀair but creates opportunities for mutual gain.
Mr Donaldson’s work provides an opportunity to reﬂect on pre-
cisely what that means. 

68

Science and technology

The Economist Apr il 22nd 2017

Also in this section
69 Detecting landmines with bacter ia
69 The pr ice of secrecy
70 Drunken crayﬁsh

Cloning voices

You took the words right out
of my mouth

It is now possible to imitate people’s speech patterns easily and precisely. That
could bring trouble
UTTER 160 or so French or English
phrases into a phone app developed
by CandyVoice, a new Parisian company,
and the app’s software will reassemble
tiny slices of those sounds to enunciate, in
a plausible simulacrum of your own dul-
cet tones, whatever typed words it is subse-
quently fed. In eﬀect, the app has cloned
your voice. The result still sounds a little
synthetic but CandyVoice’s boss, Jean-Luc
Crébouw, reckons advances in the ﬁrm’s al-
gorithms will render it increasingly natu-
ral. Similar software for English and four
widely spoken Indian languages, devel-
oped under the name of Festvox, by Car-
negie Mellon University’s Language Tech-
nologies Institute, is also available. And
Baidu, a Chinese internet giant, says it has
software that needs only 50 sentences to
simulate a person’s voice.
Until recently, voice cloning—or voice
banking, as it was then known—was a be-
spoke industry which served those at risk
of losing the power of speech to cancer or
surgery. Creating a synthetic copy of a
voice was a lengthy and pricey process. It
meant recording many phrases, each spo-
ken many times, with diﬀerent emotional
emphases and in diﬀerent contexts (state-
ment, question, command and so forth), in
order to cover all possible pronunciations.

Acapela Group, a Belgian voice-banking
company, charges €3,000 ($3,200) for a
process that requires eight hours of record-
ing. Other ﬁrms charge more and require a
speaker to spend days in a sound studio.
Not any more. Software exists that can
store slivers of recorded speech a mere ﬁve
milliseconds long, each annotated with a
precise pitch. These can be shuﬄed togeth-
er to make new words, and tweaked indi-
vidually so that they ﬁt harmoniously into
their new sonic homes. This is much
cheaper than conventional voice banking,
and permits novel uses to be developed.
With little eﬀort, a wife can lend her voice
to her blind husband’s screen-reading soft-
ware. A boss can give his to workplace ro-
bots. A Facebook user can listen to a post
apparently read aloud by its author. Par-
ents often away on business can personal-
ise their children’s wirelessly connected
talking toys. And so on. At least, that is the
vision of Gershon Silbert, boss of VivoText,
a voice-cloning ﬁrm in Tel Aviv.

Words to the wise
Next year VivoText plans to release an app
that lets users select the emphasis, speed
and level of happiness or sadness with
which individual words and phrases are
produced. Mr Silbert refers to the emotive

For daily analysis and debate on science and
technology, visit
Economist.com/science

quality of the human voice as “the ulti-
mate instrument”. Yet this power also trou-
bles him. VivoText licenses its software to
Hasbro, an American toymaker keen to sell
increasingly interactive playthings. Hasbro
is aware, Mr Silbert notes, that without
safeguards a prankster might, for example,
type curses on his mother’s smartphone in
order to see a younger sibling burst into
tears on hearing them spoken by a toy us-
ing mum’s voice.
More troubling, any voice—including
that of a stranger—can be cloned if decent
recordings are available on YouTube or
elsewhere. Researchers at the University
of Alabama, Birmingham, led by Nitesh
Saxena, were able to use Festvox to clone
voices based on only ﬁve minutes of
speech retrieved online. When tested
against voice-biometrics software like that
used by many banks to block unauthor-
ised access to accounts, more than 80% of
the fake voices tricked the computer. Alan
Black, one of Festvox’s developers, reckons
systems that rely on voice-ID software are
now “deeply, fundamentally insecure”.
And, lest people get smug about the in-
feriority of machines, humans have
proved only a little harder to fool than soft-
ware is. Dr Saxena and his colleagues
asked volunteers if a voice sample be-
longed to a person whose real speech they
had just listened to for about 90 seconds.
The volunteers recognised cloned speech
as such only half the time (ie, no better
than chance). The upshot, according to
George Papcun, an expert witness paid to
detect faked recordings produced as evi-
dence in court, is the emergence of a tech-
nology with “enormous potential value
for disinformation”. Dr Papcun, who previ-

1

The Economist Apr il 22nd 2017 

2 ously worked as a speech-synthesis scien-
tist at Los Alamos National Laboratory, a
weapons establishment in New Mexico,
ponders on things like the ability to clone
an enemy leader’s voice in wartime. 
As might be expected, countermea-
sures to sniﬀ out such deception are being
developed. Nuance Communications, a
maker of voice-activated software, is work-
ing on algorithms that detect tiny skips in
frequency at the points where slices of
speech are stuck together. Adobe, best
known as the maker of Photoshop, an im-
age-editing software suite, says that it may
encode digital watermarks into speech fab-
ricated by a voice-cloning feature called
VoCo it is developing. Such wizardry may
help computers ﬂag up suspicious speech.
Even so, it is easy to imagine the mayhem
that might be created in a world which
makes it easy to put authentic-sounding
words into the mouths of adversaries—be
they colleagues or heads of state. 7

Clear ing landmines

Illuminating the
target

Genetically engineered ﬂuorescent
bacteria can hunt for mines
BATTLEFIELDS strewn with mines are
one of the nastiest legacies of war. They
ensure that, long after a conﬂict has ceased,
people continue to be killed and maimed
by its aftermath. In 1999, the year the Ot-
tawa Mine Ban Treaty came into force,
there were more than 9,000 such casual-
ties, most of them civilians. Though this
number had fallen below 4,000 by 2014 it
is, according to the Landmine and Cluster
Munition Monitor, an international re-
search group, rising again as a conse-
quence of conﬂicts in Libya, Syria, Ukraine
and Yemen. 
These days most mines have cases
made from plastic. Only the ﬁring mecha-
nisms include any metal. That means
mines are hard to ﬁnd with metal detec-
tors. Many ingenious ways to locate and
destroy them have been developed, rang-
ing from armour-plated machines that ﬂail
the 
land, via robots equipped with
ground-penetrating radar, to specially
trained rats that can smell the explosives a
mine contains. Such methods have,
though, met with mixed success—and can
also be expensive. Flails, for instance, scat-
ter shrapnel and explosive residue around
a mineﬁeld, making it hard to conﬁrm that
no undetonated devices remain. Mine-
hunting rats, meanwhile, cost around
$8,000 each to train. Often, therefore, mine
detection boils down to rows of nervous
people wearing blast-resistant clothing

and creeping laboriously across a ﬁeld,
prodding the ground ahead to check for bu-
ried objects.
Shimshon Belkin, Aharon Agranat and
Amos Nussinovitch of the Hebrew Univer-
sity of Jerusalem reckon they have a better
approach. They have created a form of Es-
cherichia coli, a bacterium widely studied
by geneticists, that synthesises a ﬂuores-
cent protein in response to traces of vapour
given oﬀ by a mine’s explosives. As they re-
port in Nature Biotechnology, they have
now tested their invention’s eﬀectiveness
as a mine-hunter. 
To turn their bacteria into a mine-detec-
tion system, they encapsulated them in
beads of alginate, a material derived from
seaweed that is permeable to vapours
from explosives. They then scattered the
beads across an area in which real mines
had been buried and left them for a day, to
give the vapours from the mines time to
stimulate ﬂuorescent-protein production
in those beads that had landed above
mines. That done, they used a laser to scan
the ﬁeld from a distance. The laser beam
stimulated any ﬂuorescent protein it hit to
light up, indicating the location of a mine. 
The result was a qualiﬁed success. The
mines being sought had been buried either
in one of two sorts of sand or in garden soil.
The bugs detected all six sand-covered
mines, and also places where ﬂakes of ex-
plosive had been buried uncased, but were
not fooled by an explosive-free dummy
buried in the same material. They did not,
though, detect either of the mines buried
in garden soil, or ﬂakes of explosive so bu-
ried. Whether this was because the re-
searchers had not allowed enough time for
vapour evaporating from the explosives to
penetrate the soil (they had buried the tar-
gets only ﬁve days before the tests) or be-
cause those vapours cannot penetrate
such soil well enough for the bacteria to
detect them is a subject for a further test. 
Even if it can be used only in sand,
though, the approach Drs Belkin, Agranat
and Nussinovitch have come up with may
be useful. They hope to turn it into a work-
ing mine-detection system within three
years. They think they can improve the
bugs’ sensitivity to vapours from explo-
sives and plan to test other ways of encap-
sulating and dispersing them. For safety’s
sake, the E. coli they use are engineered not
to be pathogenic. They also require a spe-
cial nutrient, contained within the bead.
Once this is exhausted the bugs die rapidly. 
Besides improving their bacteria, the
group would also like to speed up the la-
ser-scanning system, so that it can cover
the ground faster. What they use at the mo-
ment could be operated from a vehicle, but
if it were made compact and light enough,
it might also be mounted on a light aircraft
or drone. If all that can be done, the world
may, at last, have a cheap and eﬀective
mine-detection system. 7

Science and technology 69

The pr ice of secrecy

Weighing heavy
on the soul

Having secrets is not a problem, but
thinking about them is
KEEPING a secret is hard work, as both
common sense and past studies con-
ﬁrm. Omitting pertinent information from
a conversation, or even intentionally mis-
leading an interlocutor, requires nimble
thinking. How much of a burden, though,
is merely possessing a secret, rather than
trying to defend it against a nosy question-
er? The catharsis that often accompanies
confessing guilty secrets suggests it may be
quite large. But, until now, no one has ex-
amined the matter scientiﬁcally.
In a study just published in the Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology, Mi-
chael Slepian of Columbia University, in
New York, attempts to correct that omis-
sion. He and his colleagues presented a set
of volunteers with a list of 38 sorts of things
surveys suggest people commonly keep
secret about themselves. Examples includ-
ed inﬁdelity, theft, poor performance at
work, sexual orientation, having under-
gone an abortion and drug taking. Some of
Dr Slepian’s volunteers participated over
the internet. Some, recruited in New York’s
biggest public space, Central Park, partici-
pated face to face. All remained anony-
mous—and, within statistical limits, both
groups responded identically.
Dr Slepian and his team asked the vol-
unteers whether, for each item on the list of

1

You did what?!

70 Science and technology

2 potential secrets, they had never had the
experience in question (and therefore had
nothing to hide); had had it, but had not
kept it secret; had had it, kept it secret for a
while, but then let it out; had had it and
kept it secret from some people but not
from others; or had had it, kept it secret
from everyone, and continued to do so. 
For each secret that a participant cur-
rently kept, the researchers asked how of-
ten that participant found himself actively
having to conceal it during conversations,
and also how often he thought about it
when not in the presence of someone from
whom he was keeping it. They also asked
participants to choose, on a 13-point scale
of well-being, whether keeping a given se-
cret had made life better or worse, with a
“+6” indicating very much better, a “-6” in-
dicating very much worse and a zero indi-
cating that keeping the secret had no eﬀect.
They also asked a series of questions that
let them construct an index of a volun-
teer’s health.
All told, the team found that 97% of par-
ticipants kept at least one of the 38 types of
secret in question, that the average person
kept 13 secrets and that it was typical for
people to have ﬁve that they had never dis-
closed to anyone else. The secret most of-
ten sequestered from the whole world was
having sexual thoughts about someone
other
than an established romantic
partner. This was followed closely by actu-
al sexual relations with such a person. The
researchers also discovered that people re-
ported pondering their secrets privately
about twice as often as they chose to con-
ceal them from others—though there was
much variation.
It was this private pondering, rather
than the actual possession of a secret, that
seemed crucial to health and well-being.
People who reported thinking about their
secrets less often than once a week over the
course of the previous month had an aver-
age health index of 66 out of 100, compared
with 49 for those who thought about their
secrets every day. Similarly, those who
thought little about their secrets had well-
being scores close to zero, while those who
thought about them a lot scored -2.
The types and numbers of secrets kept
by members of these two contrasting
groups, those who thought regularly about
their secrets and those who did not, were
not materially diﬀerent. That their reac-
tions to those secrets diﬀered is therefore
puzzling. Dr Slepian favours psychological
explanations for the damage secrets do,
such as the idea that they sometimes con-
cern unresolved issues, which thus intrude
on thinking. But that neither explains the
diﬀerent responses nor gets to the heart of
the matter. If keeping secrets is beneﬁcial—
which, presumably, it often is—evolution
might have been expected to have weeded
out those who suﬀer as a consequence of
doing so. 

Perhaps such weeding is a work in pro-
gress, for deep secrecy of the sort people
engage in becomes both possible and nec-
essary only once language has come into
being, and language is, itself, a recent evo-
lutionary phenomenon. In the meantime,
at
least one human organisation has
worked out how to beneﬁt from the bur-
den imposed by secrecy. The Roman Cath-
olic sacrament of penance and reconcilia-
tion, commonly called confession, is a
perfect response. It oﬀers to lift that burden
in a procedure that, though not cost free to
the confessor is, itself, completely secret. 7

Inebr iation

Frat-boy crayﬁsh

Crustaceans may help researchers
understand drunkenness
HUMANS are not the only species to en-
joy a snifter. Myriad experiments on
other animals, from rats and monkeys to
bees and fruit ﬂies, show that they also get
drunk, will seek out alcohol given the op-
portunity and may even develop a depen-
dence on the stuﬀ. But alcohol promotes
conviviality as well as drunkenness, and
that relationship is less well explored. In
particular, there are few studies of whether
the link is reciprocal—whether convivial-
ity, or at least a sociable environment, af-
fects susceptibility to alcohol. This ques-
tion has, however, now been looked into.
In a paper just published in Experimental
Biology, Matthew Swierzbinski, Andrew
Lazarchik and Jens Herberholz of the Uni-
versity of Maryland have shown that a so-
ciable upbringing does indeed increase
sensitivity to alcohol. At least, it does if you
are a crayﬁsh.
The three researchers’ purpose 
in
studying drunken crayﬁsh is to understand
better how alcohol induces behavioural
changes. Most recreational drugs, from co-
caine and heroin to nicotine and caﬀeine,
have well-understood eﬀects on known re-
ceptor molecules in brain cells. That is not,
though, true of ethanol, as the type of alco-
hol which gets people drunk is known to
chemists. Ethanol’s underlying molecular
mechanisms are poorly understood. But
one thing which is known is that crayﬁsh
are aﬀected by the same concentrations of
the stuﬀ as those that aﬀect humans. Since
crayﬁsh also have large, easy-to-study
nerve cells that can be examined for clues
as to ethanol’s molecular mechanisms, Mr
Swierzbinski, Mr Lazarchik and Dr Herber-
holz are using them to try to track those
mechanisms down.
Their latest experiment involved 102 of
the crustaceans that had each been kept for

The Economist Apr il 22nd 2017

between seven and ten days in the com-
pany of several dozen others, and a further
63 that had been raised in isolation for sim-
ilar amounts of time. Each crayﬁsh was
then transferred individually to a tank con-
taining a solution of ethanol in water, and
videoed for three hours to record what
happened next.
As might be expected, those animals
put into the most concentrated solution,
5.8% by volume, the strength of a potent
beer, got pretty drunk. First, they started
walking around on tiptoes. Then, they be-
gan ﬂicking their tails and doing somer-
saults (see picture). Finally, the most inebri-
ated ended up lying on their backs, kicking
their legs in the air—or, rather, in the water. 
Crayﬁsh put in weaker solutions, a half
or a tenth as concentrated, behaved simi-
larly, but got there more slowly—and, in the
case of those in the weakest solution, often
managed to avoid the leg-kicking stage al-
together. Crayﬁsh, in other words, behave
much like a bunch of roisterers out on the
town of a Saturday night. 
Crucially, though, when the researchers
examined the videos in detail, to record
what happened when, they found that, re-
gardless of alcohol concentration, animals
that had spent the previous few days in
company got drunk about 25% faster than
those that had been kept in solitary con-
ﬁnement. They therefore suspect that soci-
ety makes whatever receptor molecules it
is that interact with ethanol more plentiful
in crayﬁsh nervous systems than they oth-
erwise would be. The next stage is to com-
pare nerve cells from social and solitary
animals, to try to work out what those re-
ceptor molecules might be—and then, if
they can be so identiﬁed, to see if what is
true in crayﬁsh is also true in people. 7

I’m not as thunk as dr inkle peep I am

Books and arts

New ﬁction

Cleaning up

The Golden Legend. By Nadeem Aslam.

Knopf; 319 pages; $27.95. Faber & Faber;
£16.99

Too much political exposition can be the death of ﬁction. In his ﬁfth and ﬁnest
novel, Nadeem Aslam shows how to make great literature out of despotism 
THERE are two versions of how Pakistan
got its name, both true. The original is
the more prosaic. Choudhary Rahmat Ali,
a Punjabi Muslim nationalist, invented it
from the putative state’s component parts:
the ﬁrst letters of Punjab, Afghan province
(now Khyber Pakhtunkhwa), Kashmir,
Sindh and the ﬁnal letters of Balochistan.
The second, more beloved version, is that it
is the product of two words in Urdu and
Persian: stan and pak, which together
mean “land of the pure”. 
Pakistan has been trying to live up to
the latter version from its birth. At partition
it was cleansed of most Sikhs and Hindus.
Starting in the 1950s, its increasingly stri-
dent constitutions swept away the secular-
ism imagined by the nation’s founder, 
Muhammad Ali Jinnah. In the 1980s blas-
phemy laws were dusted oﬀ and spruced
up. They are now shiny with overuse. The
most recent campaign of decontamination
comes from the jihadists who would purge
Pakistan of its Shias and Suﬁs. In a remark-
able new novel Nadeem Aslam pours cold
water over these eﬀorts, dousing the very
notion of purity itself. 
Set in Zamana (Lahore in all but name)
the novel begins on the Grand Trunk Road.
Nargis and her husband Massud, both ar-
chitects, form part of a human chain care-
fully transferring books containing the

names of Allah or Muhammad within
them from a library to new premises. The
process is ineﬃcient, but any other mode
of transport, it is thought, might risk con-
tact with uncleanliness. Massud handles
books from the Abbasid period, from
Moorish Spain and 17th-century Holland.
A car stops at a traﬃc light in front of him. A
motorbike pulls up alongside. A gun is
drawn. Shots ring out. Massud is killed in
the crossﬁre. The book in Massud’s hands
as he dies is a work by his father, a 987-page
meditation on the mingling of civilisa-
tions, which until then had disappeared.
In the very ﬁrst chapter, Mr Aslam lays
out, as in a manifesto, his pervading
themes: intercultural exchange, piety, puri-
ty, violence. Mr Aslam, whose family ﬂed
persecution in Pakistan when he was 14
and settled in Britain, has returned to these
themes repeatedly in his previous works.
In “The Golden Legend”, which came out
in Britain in January and is now being pub-
lished in America, he distils them into a
work of quiet rage and searing beauty. 
The man who ﬁred the gun turns out to
be an American diplomat. After Massud’s

The Economist Apr il 22nd 2017 71

Also in this section
72 Dos Passos and Hemingway
72 Studying ﬁne wine
73 Eco-horror ﬁction
73 “The Handmaid’s Tale” on screen

For daily analysis and debate on books, ar ts and
culture, visit
Economist.com/culture

death an oﬃcer from Pakistan’s military in-
telligence agency visits Nargis. She is per-
suaded, eventually, to forgive the foreigner,
which under Sharia law would allow him
to go free. The persuasion takes the form of
requests, then commands, then violence,
inﬂicted both upon her and her precious
copy of Massud’s father’s book. The intelli-
gence man cuts it to shreds.
Nargis is supported during this period
by Helen, the teenage daughter of a Chris-
tian couple who worked as housekeepers
for the architects. Helen’s father, Lily, a wid-
ower, is having an aﬀair with Aysha, the
daughter of the neighbourhood’s Muslim
cleric, who also happens to be widowed.
The pair try to keep their relationship se-
cret; they know that Christians in Pakistan
are jailed “for drinking water from a Mus-
lim’s glass”. But news of it is broadcast over
the mosque’s loudspeakers. A dozen Chris-
tians are killed in the massacre that fol-
lows. Lily disappears. Nargis, Helen, and a
young Kashmiri man, Imran, who had
been visiting them, ﬂee to an abandoned
mosque on an uninhabited island in the
river that runs by the city. 
“The Golden Legend” is extravagant
with imagery and elaborate with meta-
phor, but it is never in danger of collapsing
under the weight of its prose; it is held up
by the solidity of real life. The shooting at
the start of the novel is a direct reference to
an incident in 2011 involving a CIA contrac-
tor in Lahore. An account of an attack at a
Suﬁ shrine includes details of how police-
men carried away the heads of the suicide
bombers from an attack in 2010. A chapter
about a Catholic bishop is inspired by a
scantly remembered event from 1998. Even
the description of graﬃti on Kashmiri
walls—“Indian dogs go home”—is accurate. 

1

72 Books and arts

The Economist Apr il 22nd 2017

2 Oﬀsetting the hatred and bleakness are
the luminous main characters: Nargis, Hel-
en and Imran, for whom history, culture
and religion are not circumscribed by hard
boundaries. Painstakingly, they restore
Massud’s father’s book, now thicker by
half thanks to the golden thread they use to
stitch it back together. Yet it is telling that
they must go to an island to escape Za-
mana, which translates as “the world” or
“the era”. The setting of “The Golden Le-
gend” may be Pakistan, but the closing of
minds and hearts it laments is universal. 
It is on the island that Helen reﬂects on
everything that has passed through their
land over the centuries: “And so it was that
there was no absolute purity anywhere on
the planet. The Land of the Pure did not 
exist.” It is a lesson lost on those who
would aspire to make one. 7

Dos Passos and Hemingway

The winds of war

The Ambulance Dr ivers: Hemingway, Dos
Passos, and a Fr iendship Made and Lost in

War. By James McGrath Morr is. Da Capo
Press; 312 pages; $27 
ERNEST HEMINGWAY liked chasing
after death. Given the chance to drive
an ambulance in the ﬁrst world war, he ex-
ulted: “Oh, Boy!!! I’m glad I’m in it.” Not
everyone was so eager. John Dos Passos, a
fellow writer, was also an ambulance
driver in the Great War. But he called it
“slavery”, a “tragic digression”. If the two
men held opposing views on war, they
were both also made by it. Conﬂict sculpt-
ed their relationship—and their writing. 
In “The Ambulance Drivers” James
McGrath Morris pairs the two writers and
their wars. The combination makes sense.
Hemingway and Dos Passos “held front-
row seats…on the killing ﬁelds of Europe,”
the author explains. War bound these two
very diﬀerent men together. Dos Passos
was “shy and bookish”. Hemingway any-
thing but that: he swore and womanised
his way from Paris to Havana. Dos Passos
“grew up” in the trenches, and although he
was the older by just three years, he ad-
mired Hemingway. Mr Morris follows
their friendship through the 1920s and
1930s: from bohemian Paris to languid
days oﬀ the Florida coast. 
War shaped their politics, too. Dos Pas-
sos was jolted by the “tragedy” of what he
witnessed in France and Italy. “Three Sol-
diers”, the war novel he published in 1921,
saw oﬀ any idea that war was glorious.
Dos Passos was a stern socialist who
“wanted to write about war to end it,” ex-
plains Mr Morris. Hemingway was un-

moved. War made him a cynic. For him,
“literature could capture the experience,
not change it,” says Mr Morris. 
This diﬀerence came out in their prose.
Hemingway jabbed out phrases, to pen
“the truest sentence that you know”. Dos
Passos experimented with modernism in-
stead. He stuck words together (“rainseeth-
ing” was one) and quoted song lyrics. The
result is a howl against the “decadence” of
modern capitalism. These passages of liter-
ary analysis do not impede the pleasure of
the book. They ﬂoat, as Mr Morris tugs the
reader into the boozy, bitchy world of his
protagonists. Famous friends bustle in and
out. Zelda and F. Scott Fitzgerald host Dos
Passos for lunch, then get drunk and insult
an estate agent. A hoard of private letters 
illuminate the characters’ inner lives. 
If “The Ambulance Drivers” is as read-
able as a novel, there is also the occasional
slip. Mr Morris alludes to things without
explaining them. Who are the Bersaglieri?
What is a thobe? The author does not say.
Dos Passos’s Madeiran-Portuguese heri-
tage is ﬁrst mentioned casually deep into
the book. A few mistakes jar, too. “A Fare-
well to Arms” features the Battle of Capo-
retto, not “Caporetta”. 
But these are niggles. Mr Morris does a
ﬁne job of conjuring his characters. Their
second conﬂict, the Spanish civil war,
would be their last. By the mid-1930s, Hem-
ingway felt “envy and growing resent-
ment” towards his friend, Mr Morris
writes. Dos Passos, though poor, was loved
by critics. Spain broke Hemingway. He dis-
owned his friend, and accused him of fas-
cism. This was typical of his cruel type of
selﬁshness. “Hemingway destroyed every
friendship, every love aﬀair,” concludes
Mr Morris. They died without reconciling,
which is a pity. As this sad, vivid book
shows, they had much in common. 7

A fr iendship forged in the ﬁght

Studying wine

Learn how to
smell

Cork Dork. By Bianca Bosker. Penguin; 329
pages; $17
FOR a subject that purports to be an 
arcane niche, the milieu of obsessive
sommeliers has attracted much media at-
tention recently. First came “Somm”, a doc-
umentary released in 2012 about four stu-
dents preparing for the gruelling Master
Sommelier
(MS) exam. 
Its
success
spawned both “Uncorked”, a reality-tele-
vision show that shadows a new crop of
budding MS candidates, and a feature-
length sequel called “Into the Bottle”, pro-
ﬁling winemakers. Now this select fraterni-
ty of (mostly male) service professionals
has come in for literary star treatment as
well. In “Cork Dork” Bianca Bosker, a tech-
nology journalist by trade, chronicles her
immersive year-long quest to join the club,
and the transformation it wrought on her
senses and psyche.
Readers who have yet to watch any 
instalment of the “Somm” or “Uncorked”
series will ﬁnd Ms Bosker a skilled guide as
she escorts them on her journey through
many of the weirder crannies of the wine-
consumption world. (Farmers and wine-
makers, save for the industrial “masstige”
producers in California, are conspicuously
absent.) 
Her tale duly features fermented grape
juice lofting her protagonists into manic ec-
stasy or plunging them into the depths of
despair. One sommelier compares Pinot-
age to the torture technique in which “you
get a tyre, douse it in gasoline, stick it
around someone’s neck, and light it on
ﬁre”. It proﬁles scientists who study the
physiology of taste and smell, including a
German who conducts regular experi-
ments on human bodies and occasionally
needs to transport them. He recalls one ca-
daver he had to dissect with a “Black and
Decker” saw. It recounts horror stories of
unruly diners, such as the one about the
man who told a black waitress in New York
to calm down because her president was
in oﬃce, and of arrogant judges at somme-
lier competitions: one sought to unsettle a
candidate by using his ﬁnger to probe the
depths of his right nostril while ordering.
However, even such grand cru-quality
anecdotes are unlikely to surprise the por-
tion of Ms Bosker’s audience that has al-
ready been indoctrinated into sommelier
subculture. (Morgan Harris, the author’s
“wine fairy godmother” and the book’s
main character, 
is also featured 
in 
“Uncorked”.) Although the author is a live-
ly portraitist, “Cork Dork” is essentially
structured as a travelogue: she would very

1

The Economist Apr il 22nd 2017 

2

much like to qualify as a certiﬁed somme-
lier (and ultimately does), but the fate of
her career hardly hangs in the balance.
That leaves it bereft of the plot, suspense
and occasional conﬂict that made the origi-
nal “Somm” so gripping.
In lieu of drama, “Cork Dork” oﬀers two
notable virtues. First, it is an outstanding
beginner’s primer on wine. Shoehorned
into the narrative are comprehensive pro-
ﬁles of the ﬂavours and aromas of the most
prevalent grape varieties and how they
vary by region and maturity. It also gives a
breakdown of the principal components
of a wine and a guide to recognising and
distinguishing them. Ms Bosker inter-
sperses her vignettes with these lessons so
deftly that you are likely to miss them if
you fail to take notes. But a diligent reader
will emerge with the same degree of

knowledge that you would expect from an
introductory wine course.
Second, Ms Bosker oﬀers a payload for
knowledgeable and passionate wine lov-
ers—the “cork dorks” of the title. Its con-
cluding chapters constitute an extended
ode to oenological mastery as a path to
heightened consciousness: once you learn
how to smell, it doesn’t stop at wine. 
Ms Bosker now regularly complements
her visual perception of the world with an
olfactory one: on a road trip through Cali-
fornia, “San Rafael smelled like sweet-and-
sour chicken; Larkspur like potatoes cook-
ing with rosemary…I smelled the salty
brine of sea air mixed with a thick, soapy
perfume of detergent and garlic even be-
fore I saw the signs for San Francisco. It was
then that I realised I’d driven the whole
way without turning on the radio.” 7

New ﬁction

Argentinian eco-horror

Fever Dream. By Samanta Schweblin.
Translated by Megan McDowell. Riverhead
Books; 192 pages; $25. Oneworld; £12.99
THIS small debut novel packs a mighty,
and lingering, punch. In “Fever
Dream” Samanta Schweblin (pictured),
an Argentinian short-story writer based
in Berlin, wraps contemporary night-
mares, both private and public, into a
compact, but explosive, package. Ms
Schweblin delivers a skin-prickling mas-
terclass in dread and suspense. Sentence
by sinister sentence, she instils and then
intensiﬁes “a terrifying feeling of doom”.
In rural Argentina, a frightened
holidaymaker named Amanda lies dying
in a clinic. David, the son of a local wom-
an called Carla, interrogates the delirious
patient about the events that have led her
into this place of “danger and madness”.
Amanda, in turn, recounts conversations
with Carla that reveal, in fragments, a
terrible tale. And what has become of
Nina, Amanda’s daughter, whom her
mother so fearfully kept within “rescue
distance”? Convulsed by doubt and pain,
she torments herself: “Was I a bad moth-
er? Is it something I caused?”
In whispered snatches, the reader is
told of poisonings and contaminations,
of children hideously harmed, a blighted
community and “something small and
invisible that has ruined everything”.
Around this double dialogue, perspec-
tives shift and blur. Reality shimmers like
the summer haze over the chemically
enhanced green of the surrounding soya
ﬁelds. No “rescue distance”, the reader
learns, can ever be small enough for

A great start

safety. As David says (or, perhaps, as
Amanda hallucinates him saying):
“Whatever has cursed this town for the
past ten years is now inside me.”
With virtuoso skill, well served in
Megan McDowell’s ﬁnely textured trans-
lation, Ms Schweblin fuses a study in
maternal anxiety with an ecological
horror story. She refracts both strands
through the eerie prism of her narrative,
almost as if Henry James had scripted a
disaster movie about toxic agribusiness.
The author has linked her “motionless
scourge” to the pesticide-blasted prairies
of Argentina. And then there is the abyss
of a mother’s anguish. “My head”, Carla
recalls, “was a tangled mess of guilt and
terror.” As Ms Schweblin lands her
punch, so will the reader’s be. 

Books and arts 73

“The Handmaid’s Tale”

Under his eye

A television series breathes new life
into Margaret Atwood’s novel
THE most nightmarish dystopian
worlds are both familiar and incongru-
ous, existing on the peripheries of pos-
sibility. A prime example is “The Hand-
maid’s Tale”, written in 1985 and now a
ten-part television series which will be 
released on Hulu from April 26th. 
In it an American society is ruled by a
theocratic
dictatorship. Women are
stripped of their jobs—bank accounts and
property are handed over to their hus-
bands or male next-of-kin—and forbidden
from reading. They are recategorised un-
der the new regime: women who can bear
children become “handmaids”, made to
conceive the babies of high-ranking mili-
tary personnel whose wives are barren. In-
fertile women, dissidents and lesbians are
sent to die farming toxic land. 
Ms Atwood’s book is brought terrify-
ingly to life by a star-studded cast, which
includes Elisabeth Moss (of “Mad Men”),
Samira Wiley (“Orange is the New Black”),
Alexis Bledel (“Gilmore Girls”) and Joseph
Fiennes (“Shakespeare in Love”). Most al-
terations to the plot, such as making the re-
gime more brutal—the command “if thine
right eye oﬀends thee, pluck it out” is literal-
ly enforced upon one rebellious hand-
maiden—make the mood more tense and
the characters’ quiet obedience more un-
derstandable. The decision to open with
June (later known as Oﬀred, played with
muted horror by Ms Moss) attempting to
ﬂee the country with her husband and
young daughter pays oﬀ: the viewer is im-
mediately concerned with her plight.
Jumping between her life before and after
the regime, the series slowly pieces togeth-
er the person June once was and the free-
doms she used to enjoy. 
With women’s reproductive rights at
the centre of its narrative, the series has
been praised for its timeliness. Ms Moss
has said that the cast and crew “never
wanted to show to be this relevant”. But as
the Trump administration continues to cut
funding and roll back family-planning ser-
vices, it is easy to hear echoes of its rhetoric
on the screen. 
Yet “The Handmaid’s Tale” is searing
because so many women have no more
control over their own bodies today than
they did in 1985. What rights they have
earned are subject to the whims and politi-
cal persuasions of men in power. If Ms 
Atwood’s tale feels nightmarish it
is 
precisely because it is enduringly, and
maddeningly, familiar. 7

74

Courses

The Economist Apr il 22nd 2017

Courses

75

Announcements

The Economist Apr il 22nd 2017

76

Economic and ﬁnancial indicators

The Economist Apr il 22nd 2017

Economic data

Gross domestic product 

Industr ial 
production 

latest 

Statistics on 42 economies, plus a
closer look at Japan’s economy

Consumer pr ices Unemployment 
rate, % 

Current-account balance 

Economic data

% change on year ago

+6.9 Q1 
+1.6 Q4 
+1.9 Q4 
+1.9 Q4 
+1.8 Q4 
+1.7 Q4 
+1.2 Q4 
+1.1 Q4 
+1.8 Q4 
-1.4 Q4 
+1.0 Q4 
+2.5 Q4 
+3.0 Q4 

United States +2.0 Q4 
China 
Japan 
Br itain 
Canada 
Euro area 
Austr ia 
Belgium 
France 
Germany 
Greece 
Italy 
Netherlands 
Spain 
Czech Republic +2.0 Q4 
Denmark 
Norway 
Poland 
Russia 
Sweden  
Switzerland 
Turkey 
Australia 
Hong Kong 
India 
Indonesia 
Malaysia 
Pakistan 
Philippines 
Singapore 
South Korea 
Taiwan 
Thailand 
Argentina 
Brazil 
Chile 
Colombia 
Mexico 
Venezuela 
Egypt 
Israel 
Saudi Arabia 
South Afr ica 

+2.3 Q4 
+1.8 Q4 
+3.2 Q4 
+0.3 Q4 
+2.3 Q4 
+0.6 Q4 
+3.5 Q4 
+2.4 Q4 
+3.1 Q4 
+7.0 Q4 
+4.9 Q4 
+4.5 Q4 

+6.6 Q4 
+2.9 Q4 
+2.4 Q4 
+2.9 Q4 
+3.0 Q4 
-2.1 Q4 
-2.5 Q4 
+0.5 Q4 
+1.6 Q4 
+2.4 Q4 
-8.8 Q4~ 
+3.4 Q3 
+4.3 Q4 
+1.4 2016 
+0.7 Q4 

+5.7 2016** 

qtr* 2017† 
+2.1 +2.3 
+5.3 +6.5 
+1.2 
+1.2 
+2.7 
+1.7 
+2.6 +2.0 
+1.9 
+1.6 
+2.0 
+1.6 
+2.0 
+1.4 
+1.7 
+1.3 
+1.7 
+1.6 
-4.8 
+1.2 
+0.7 +0.9 
+2.5 +2.0 
+2.8 +2.6 
+1.6 +2.5 
+1.9 
+1.4 
+4.5 
+1.8 
+7.0 +3.2 
na 
+1.4 
+4.2 +2.6 
+0.3 
+1.4 
na +2.6 
+4.4 +2.7 
+4.8 +2.6 
+5.1 
+7.2 
na +5.2 
na +4.3 
na +5.4 
+7.0 +6.6 
-1.9 
+2.1 
+2.0 +2.5 
+1.8 
+1.8 
+1.7 +3.5 
+1.9 +2.7 
-3.4 +0.6 
-1.4 
+1.8 
+4.0 +2.4 
+2.9 
+1.5 
-6.2 
-5.5 
na +3.9 
+6.5 +3.9 
na +0.8 
-0.3 
+1.1 

latest 
latest 
2017† 
+1.5 Mar 
+2.4 Mar 
+2.4 
+7.6 Mar 
+0.9 Mar 
+2.3 
+4.7 Feb 
+0.2 Feb 
+0.7 
+2.8 Feb 
+2.3 Mar 
+2.7 
+3.5 Jan 
+2.0 Feb 
+1.9 
+1.2 Feb 
+1.5 Mar 
+1.6 
-1.1 Jan 
+2.0 Mar 
+1.7 
-1.6 Jan 
+2.3 Mar 
+2.0 
-0.7 Feb 
+1.1 Mar 
+1.3 
+2.3 Feb 
+1.6 Mar 
+1.8 
+10.7 Feb 
+1.7 Mar 
+0.8 
+1.9 Feb 
+1.4 Mar 
+1.4 
+5.1 Feb 
+1.1 Mar 
+1.2 
-1.7 Feb 
+2.3 Mar 
+2.2 
+2.7 Feb 
+2.6 Mar 
+2.4 
+2.3 Feb 
+1.0 Mar 
+1.2 
-4.0 Feb 
+2.4 Mar 
+2.4 
+1.2 Feb 
+2.0 Mar 
+2.0 
+0.8 Mar 
+4.2 Mar 
+4.5 
+4.1 Feb 
+1.3 Mar 
+1.6 
-1.2 Q4 
+0.6 Mar 
+0.5 
-1.7 Feb +11.3 Mar 
+9.7 
+1.0 Q4 
+1.5 Q4 
+2.1 
-0.7 Q4 
-0.1 Feb 
+1.7 
-1.2 Feb 
+3.8 Mar 
+4.6 
+3.3 Feb 
+3.6 Mar 
+4.3 
+4.7 Feb 
+5.1 Mar 
+4.0 
+8.1 Feb 
+4.9 Mar 
+4.6 
+10.8 Feb 
+3.4 Mar 
+3.3 
+12.6 Feb 
+0.7 Feb 
+1.3 
+6.6 Feb 
+2.2 Mar 
+1.8 
+10.6 Feb 
+0.2 Mar 
+2.1 
-1.5 Feb 
+0.8 Mar 
+1.3 
-2.5 Oct 
— 
-0.8 Feb 
+4.6 Mar 
+4.5 
-7.6 Feb 
+2.7 Mar 
+3.0 
-3.2 Feb 
+4.7 Mar 
+4.0 
-1.7 Feb 
+5.4 Mar 
+5.0 
na  
na  
+562 
+23.9 Feb +30.9 Mar +19.2 
+3.2 Jan 
+0.9 Mar 
+0.6 
na  
-0.4 Mar 
+2.0 
-2.4 Feb 
+6.1 Mar 
+5.7 

— *** 

latest 12 
months, $bn 
-481.2 Q4 
+196.4 Q4 
+187.8 Feb 
-115.7 Q4 
-51.2 Q4 
+387.3 Jan 
+6.6 Q4 
-2.0 Dec 
-28.5 Feb 
+287.3 Feb 
-0.6 Jan 
+47.5 Jan 
+64.8 Q4 
+24.9 Jan 
+2.3 Q4 
+24.9 Feb 
+18.1 Q4 
+0.4 Feb 
+34.9 Q1 
+23.7 Q4 
+70.6 Q4 
-33.7 Feb 
-33.1 Q4 
+14.5 Q4 
-11.9 Q4 
-16.3 Q4 
+6.0 Q4 
-7.1 Q1 
+0.6 Dec 
+56.7 Q4 
+97.6 Feb 
+70.9 Q4 
+46.8 Q4 
-15.0 Q4 
-22.8 Feb 
-3.6 Q4 
-12.5 Q4 
-27.9 Q4 
-17.8 Q3~ 
-20.1 Q4 
+12.4 Q4 
-24.9 Q4 
-9.5 Q4 

% of GDP 
2017† 
-2.8 
+1.7 
+3.5 
-4.0 
-2.7 
+3.0 
+2.4 
+1.1 
-1.0 
+8.2 
-1.2 
+2.5 
+8.5 
+1.5 
+0.7 
+7.1 
+5.3 
-1.2 
+2.8 
+4.8 
+9.7 
-4.4 
-1.3 
+5.9 
-1.0 
-2.0 
+2.8 
-2.6 
+0.3 
+19.2 
+6.4 
+12.1 
+11.7 
-2.7 
-1.6 
-1.3 
-3.6 
-2.6 
-1.5 
-6.2 
+4.4 
-2.1 
-3.6 

4.5 Mar 
4.0 Q4§ 
2.8 Feb 

4.7 Jan†† 

6.7 Mar 
9.5 Feb 
5.7 Feb 
7.0 Feb 
10.0 Feb 

3.9 Feb‡ 

23.5 Jan 
11.5 Feb 
6.1 Mar 
18.0 Feb 

3.5 Feb‡ 

4.3 Feb 

4.2 Jan‡‡ 
8.2 Mar§ 
5.4 Mar§ 
7.4 Feb§ 

3.3 Mar 
13.0 Jan§ 
5.9 Mar 

3.3 Feb‡‡ 
5.0 2015 

5.6 Q3§ 

3.5 Feb§ 
5.9 2015 

6.6 Q1§ 
2.2 Q4 

4.2 Mar§ 

3.8 Feb 

1.1 Feb§ 

7.6 Q4§ 
13.2 Feb§ 

6.4 Feb§‡‡ 

10.5 Feb§ 
3.5 Feb 

7.3 Apr§ 

12.4 Q4§ 
4.3 Feb 

5.6 2015 

26.5 Q4§ 

Budget 
balance 

Interest
rates, %

% of GDP 10-year gov't 
2017† 
bonds, latest 
-3.5 
2.23 
-4.0 
3.29§§ 
-5.3 
nil 
-4.0 
1.06 
-2.6 
1.47 
-1.6 
0.20 
-1.1 
0.51 
-2.7 
0.72 
-3.1 
1.00 
+0.5 
0.20 
-6.4 
6.69 
-2.4 
2.28 
+0.6 
0.44 
-3.3 
1.67 
-0.5 
1.01 
-1.4 
0.52 
+2.8 
1.55 
-3.2 
3.38 
-2.9 
8.13 
-0.4 
0.53 
+0.2 
-0.20 
-2.1 
10.89 
-1.8 
2.46 
+1.5 
1.41 
-3.2 
6.85 
-2.2 
7.00 
-3.1 
4.11 
-4.8 
7.97††† 
-2.4 
5.32 
-1.0 
2.09 
-1.0 
2.14 
-0.7 
1.03 
-2.3 
2.50 
-4.1 
na 
-7.7 
9.88 
-2.2 
3.79 
-2.8 
6.40 
-2.5 
7.17 
-19.6 
10.43 
-10.8 
na 
-2.3 
2.17 
-7.3 
3.68 
-3.1 
8.79 

Currency units, per $

Apr 19th 
- 
6.89 
109 
0.78 
1.34 
0.93 
0.93 
0.93 
0.93 
0.93 
0.93 
0.93 
0.93 
0.93 
25.1 
6.94 
8.56 
3.97 
56.3 
8.98 
1.00 
3.67 
1.33 
7.77 
64.6 
13,297 
4.40 
105 
49.7 
1.40 
1,140 
30.4 
34.4 
15.4 
3.14 
649 
2,847 
18.8 
10.1 
18.2 
3.67 
3.75 
13.3 

year ago
-
6.47
109
0.69
1.27
0.88
0.88
0.88
0.88
0.88
0.88
0.88
0.88
0.88
23.8
6.54
8.11
3.78
65.5
8.08
0.96
2.83
1.28
7.76
66.6
13,148
3.89
105
46.1
1.34
1,136
32.3
34.9
14.1
3.55
657
2,914
17.3
9.99
8.88
3.76
3.75
14.3

Source: Haver Analytics.  *% change on previous quar ter, annual rate. †The Economist poll or Economist Intelligence Unit estimate/forecast. §Not seasonally adjusted. ‡New ser ies. ~2014 **Year ending June. ††Latest 
3 months. ‡‡3-month moving average. §§5-year yield. ***Of f icial number not yet proved to be reliable; The State Street Pr iceStats Inf lation Index, Jan 29.53%; year ago 30.79% †††Dollar-denominated bonds. 

 
 
 
 
The Economist Apr il 22nd 2017 

Economic and ﬁnancial indicators 77

Japan

GDP per person, annual average

% increase on a year earlier

Japan
OECD average

Central-bank balance-sheets, % of GDP

Markets

Markets

2,838.9 
3,770.4 
5,003.7 
12,016.5 
679.0 
19,824.6 
511.3 
1,042.3 
967.5 
840.7 
32,688.1 
750.6 
59,515.2 
1,068.6 
1,565.7 
8,532.3 
90,804.1 
5,839.9 

% change on
Dec 30th 2016
Index 
one 
in local 
in $
Apr 19th week currency terms
20,404.5 
-0.9 
+3.2 
+3.2
3,320.2 
-3.2 
+2.2 
+3.1
18,432.2 
-0.6 
-3.6 
+3.2
7,114.4 
-3.2 
-0.4 
+3.3
15,552.9 
-0.6 
+1.7 
+1.5
-1.2 
+4.5 
+6.1
-1.4 
+4.0 
+5.6
-1.4 
+8.4 
+10.1
-1.0 
+4.5 
+6.2
-1.9 
+2.9 
+4.5
-1.1 
+4.7 
+6.3
-0.9 
+5.5 
+7.2
-0.9 
+3.1 
+4.7
-1.3 
+5.8 
+7.5
+0.1 
+10.5 +12.2
-1.6 
+5.0 
+7.4
-0.5 
+5.3 
+6.9
+0.9 
+2.1 
+2.2
-2.2 
-1.8 
-1.3
+1.9 
+15.0 +21.0
-0.9 
-7.3 
-7.3
-0.6 
+3.2 
+4.4
-1.5 
+3.8 
+5.7
-0.2 
+16.2 +11.5
-2.2 
+2.1 
+6.1
-2.0 
+8.3 
+8.0
-1.0 
+10.2 +15.8
-0.7 
+5.8 
+7.3
-0.3 
+5.9 
+8.0
-1.8 
-0.4 
-0.9
-1.9 
+8.5 +12.2
+0.4 
+5.5 +11.8
-1.8 
+4.2 +10.4
-1.4 
+1.6 
+5.7
-1.4 
+21.3 +24.7
-0.8 
+5.3 
+9.2
-0.4 
+17.1 +20.8
-1.2 
+0.2 
+5.6
-0.2 
+7.1 
+17.4
+1.1 
+50.0 
na
-0.7 
+4.5 
+4.5
-0.2 
-1.7 
+3.1
-2.1 
-4.0 
-4.0
-1.9 
+3.7 
+6.8

United States (DJIA) 
China (SSEA) 
Japan (Nikkei 225) 
Br itain (FTSE 100) 
Canada (S&P TSX) 
Euro area (FTSE Euro 100) 1,162.0 
Euro area (EURO STOXX 50) 3,421.0 
Austr ia (ATX) 
Belgium (Bel 20) 
France (CAC 40) 
Germany (DAX)* 
Greece (Athex Comp) 
Italy (FTSE/MIB) 
Netherlands (AEX) 
Spain (Madr id SE) 
Czech Republic (PX) 
Denmark (OMXCB) 
Hungary (BUX) 
Norway (OSEAX) 
Poland (WIG) 
Russia (RTS, $ terms) 
Sweden (OMXS30) 
Switzerland (SMI) 
Turkey (BIST) 
Australia (All Ord.) 
Hong Kong (Hang Seng) 23,825.9 
India (BSE) 
Indonesia (JSX) 
Malaysia (KLSE) 
Pakistan (KSE) 
Singapore (STI) 
South Korea (KOSPI) 
Taiwan (TWI)  
Thailand (SET) 
Argentina (MERV) 
Brazil (BVSP) 
Chile (IGPA) 
Colombia (IGBC) 
Mexico (IPC) 
Venezuela (IBC) 
Egypt (EGX 30) 
Israel (TA-100) 
Saudi Arabia (Tadawul) 
South Afr ica (JSE AS) 

29,336.6 
5,606.5 
1,739.0 
47,603.5 
3,126.3 
2,138.4 
9,639.9 
1,567.2 
20,513.2 
63,407.0 
24,281.1 
10,123.1 
48,873.8 
47,561.2 
12,895.3 
1,255.4 
6,948.1 
52,545.1 

1.5

1.0

0.5

0

250
200
150
100
50
0

1997-2012

2012-16

Gross government debt, % of GDP

Japan

OECD average

United States

1997 99 2001 03 05 07 09 11 13

16

Source: OECD

Other markets

336.7 
1,471.4 

Other markets

% change on
Dec 30th 2016
Index 
one 
in local 
in $
Apr 19th week currency terms
2,338.2 
-0.3 
+4.4 
+4.4
+0.5 
+8.9 
+8.9
-2.1 
-1.5 
-1.5
-0.5 
-3.1 
+3.7
-1.5 
+3.7 
+5.3
1,835.0 
-0.4 
+4.8 
+4.8
952.9 
-0.6 
+10.5 +10.5
444.6 
-0.4 
+5.4 
+5.4
910.9 
+0.8 
+3.1 
+3.1
813.5 
+0.7 
+5.4 
+5.4
1,221.9§ 
nil 
+1.5 
+1.5
14.9 +15.8 
+14.0 (levels)
77.1 
+0.4 
+6.9 
+8.6
68.8 
+3.4 
+1.5 
+1.5
4.8 
-2.4 
-26.4 
-25.3

United States (S&P 500) 
United States (NAScomp) 5,863.0 
China (SSEB, $ terms) 
Japan (Topix) 
Europe (FTSEurof irst 300) 1,481.1 
World, dev'd (MSCI) 
Emerging markets (MSCI) 
World, all (MSCI) 
World bonds (Citigroup) 
EMBI+ (JPMorgan) 
Hedge funds (HFRX) 
Volatility, US (VIX) 
CDSs, Eur (iTRAXX)† 
CDSs, N Am (CDX)† 
Carbon trading (EU ETS) € 

Sources: IHS Markit; Thomson Reuters.  *Total return index. 
†Credit-default-swap spreads, basis points. §Apr 18th.

Indicators for more countr ies and additional
Indicators for more countr ies and additional

ser ies, go to: Economist.com/indicators
ser ies, go to: Economist.com/indicators

Japan

Euro area

United States
2007 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16

Core consumer pr ices, % change on a year earlier*

100
80
60
40
20
0

2

+

0

1

–

1

1997 99 2001 03 05 07 09 11 13

16

2

*Excludes impact of consumption-tax r ises in 1997 and 2014

The Economist commodity-pr ice index

2005=100

The Economist commodity-price index

% change on
one 
one
Apr 11th Apr 18th* month 
year

Dollar Index

All Items 
Food 
Industr ials 
 All 
 Nfa† 
 Metals 

Sterling Index

All items 

Euro Index

All items 

Gold

$ per oz 

142.3 
151.4 

132.9 
138.1 
130.7 

141.3 
151.0 

131.2 
136.3 
129.0 

-3.4 
-3.1 

-3.8 
-6.1 
-2.8 

+5.0
-3.8

+18.0
+14.2
+19.8

207.3 

201.4 

-5.6 

+18.5

166.5 

164.2 

-2.4 

+11.7

1,272.2 

1,287.5 

+3.6 

+2.7

West Texas Intermediate

$ per barrel 

53.4 

52.4 

+10.7 

+27.7

Sources: Bloomberg; CME Group; Cotlook; Darmenn & Curl; FT; ICCO;
ICO; ISO; Live Rice Index; LME; NZ Wool Ser vices; Thompson Lloyd & 
Ewar t; Thomson Reuters; Urner Barr y; WSJ.  *Provisional  
†Non-food agr iculturals.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
78

Obituar y Yevgeny Yevtushenko

More than a poet

Yevgeny Yevtushenko, a Russian poet, died on April 1st, aged 83
BABI YAR was the site of the most notori-
intonation and vigorous hand gestures,
ous massacre of the Holocaust. But
was a particular hit. His output was prodi-
when Yevgeny Yevtushenko visited the ra-
gious. His poetry books sold in their mil-
vine outside Kiev in 1961, he found no mon-
lions, a privilege few Russian poets en-
ument there to the nearly 34,000 victims,
joyed. There were novels and ﬁlms too. 
just lorries dumping piles of stinking rub-
His technique was honed and immacu-
bish. He hurried away and wrote a poem,
late; as a teenager, he searched for an un-
decrying not only the Nazi executioners
used rhyme for every Russian word. The
but also Soviet anti-Semitism and the am-
results might lack subtlety, but never im-
nesia it fostered.
pact. Even his critic Joseph Brodsky, a great
Russian poet forced into exile, said he
knew hundreds of Mr Yevtushenko’s lines
by heart. They were simple, even staccato,
dealing with fresh, forthright ideas—love
and longing, memory and forgetting, pride
and shame—delivered with utter self-con-
ﬁdence and transparent enjoyment. The
secret, he said, was “in bridging the gap/Be-
tween the word and our hearts”.

The leaders of the tavern mob are raging
And they stink of vodka and onions.
Kicked aside by a boot, I lie helpless.
In vain I plead with the brutes
As voices roar:
“Kill the Jews! Save Russia!”

It was brave, heartfelt—and well-timed.
Nikita Khrushchev’s thaw was breaking
over the Soviet Union, and the previously
unsayable was being said. Dmitri Shosta-
kovich set “Babi Yar” to the opening move-
ment of his 13th Symphony. Shamefaced
Soviet Ukrainian bureaucrats closed the
tip and put up a modest memorial.
To his fans, the episode epitomised the
Yevtushenko they adored: an idealist who
spoke for his generation, a man whose hu-
manism transcended the cold war. They
ﬂocked in their tens of thousands to his
readings of his own and other writers’
work, making him the rock-star poet of his
age; “Babi Yar”, declaimed with elaborate

Performance poet
Charming (notably and insistently to
women), inquisitive and quick-tongued,
he seemed a world away from the grey,
stolid Soviet cultural establishment. He
was no golden child of the literary nomen-
klatura, but rather a genuine product of
communist meritocracy, born in Siberia in
a family savaged by Stalinist purges, who
scrabbled his way to stardom by penning
verses for a sports newspaper. 
The cultural commissars preferred to

The Economist Apr il 22nd 2017

keep such popular, restless talents in a gild-
ed cage, rather than banishing or jailing
them. Only the greatest resisted that em-
brace. He was not one of them. 
It helped that his style ﬁtted unproble-
matically into the Soviet poetical canon. Its
content reﬂected the lively, even trouble-
some, spirit of the post-Stalinist 1950s and
1960s, but even that could be tolerated,
within limits, especially as that toleration
proved that the Soviet system was not as
monolithic as its critics claimed. 
It all made him an easy target for those
who thought his real-world stances should
match the lofty ideals of his poetry. In 1987
Brodsky resigned from the American
Academy in protest at Mr Yevtushenko’s
honorary membership, complaining: “He
throws stones only in directions that are of-
ﬁcially sanctioned and approved.” Two de-
cades earlier, a campaign in Britain sty-
mied his election to the Oxford poetry
professorship.
The critics had a point. He bemoaned
the Soviet system’s imperfections while
mounting rose-tinted defences of
its
achievements and wince-making attacks
on the West. He baﬄed students in New
York when he defended a scandalous pros-
ecution by asking: “How would you react
if one of your writers published a book in
Europe under an assumed name?”
His celebrity gave him clout, when he
chose to use it. He chided Khrushchev for
his U-turn against cultural freedom and de-
fended some victims of persecution, in-
cluding, in the 1960s, Brodsky—but not Bo-
ris Pasternak, whose “Dr Zhivago”, he said,
was not worth publishing. He lamented
the Soviet-led invasion of Czechoslovakia
in 1968. But these protests were within the
system, not against it. Other writers, such
as Alexander Solzhenitsyn, focused dis-
content; he acted as its safety valve. His
worst punishments were expulsion from
university for praising an anti-Stalinist
novel, or media scoldings by hardliners.
After publishing an unsanctioned autobi-
ography abroad, he apologised grovelingly
for his “irreparable mistake”. While he was
enjoying the fruits of fame, political pris-
oners were dying in labour camps. 
Despite his peacock dress sense and
penchant for self-promotion, he was a self-
deprecating man who claimed no great
bravery, let alone genius. One of his novels
dismissed his own work as a phase to be
grown out of. His admirers might overstate
his merits; he did not.
After 1991 his star waned. Post-Soviet
Russia lost its taste for performance poetry.
He spent much of his time teaching, in the
congenial but unglamorous University of
Tulsa, Oklahoma. One of his later poems
mourned the Czech philosopher-play-
wright Vaclav Havel, ending: “Who will
tell us what to do next?” Some of his coun-
terparts needed nobody to tell them. 7

Global Treasury Crossings

A brave new world 

May 18th 2017 • Singapore

CHRISTOPHER EMSLIE
Country treasurer
ABB Singapore

ANDREW LIM
Group chief 
ﬁ nancial ofﬁ cer
CapitaLand

RANI MISRA
Assistant regional 
treasurer
Cargill Asia-Paciﬁ c 

NEELAMANI 
MUTHUKUMAR
Group chief 
ﬁ nancial ofﬁ cer
Olam International

DAVID MANN
Chief economist, Asia 
Standard Chartered

KAUSHIK MITRA
Senior vice-president and 
chief ﬁ nancial ofﬁ cer 
Suntory PepsiCo

To deliver value in this current climate, treasurers must be able to support 
their businesses through geopolitical uncertainty and economic turbulence 
by anticipating emerging risks and capitalising on opportunities. At the same 
time, their roles are changing. Treasurers are increasingly expected to embed 
themselves as internal consultants across the business to ensure smooth sailing.

Join us at Global Treasury Crossings: A brave new world, as we examine 
this conﬂ uence of challenge and opportunity for today’s treasurers. How are 
they supporting their companies through troubling times? What strategies, 
tools and operating models help them deliver value and ensure business 
continuity? How is technology enabling treasurers to evolve into more 
strategically inﬂ uential leaders? And, what’s next for this new breed of 
entrepreneurial treasurer?

APPLY FOR YOUR PLACE*

growthcrossings.economist.com

(Click Events > Global Treasury events > 
Singapore 2017 > Apply to Attend)

asiaevents@economist.com
+852 2585 3312

* Places are strictly limited. All registrations 
are subject to availability and approval by 
The Economist Events. 

Global Treasury Crossings Conferences

SINGAPORE

May 17th 2016

NEW YORK

May 25th 2016

HONG KONG

June 23rd 2016

VIENNA

October 11th 2016

SINGAPORE

May 18th 2017

BARCELONA

October 3rd 2017

Jo in the conve rsa t ion
@Econom istEvents #G row thc ross ings  

grow thcrossings.economist.com

Supported by

Tambour Au toma t ic Chronograph

m

o

c

.

n
o

t
t
i

u
v
s

i

u
o

l

