Do Russian sanctions work?

After extinction: a boom in new species

The People’s Liberation Army at 90

Don’t tax fuel, tax roads

AUGUST 5TH– 11TH 2017

It could happen

‘ We believe cycling fans deserve  
a revolutionary viewing experience’ 

Yann Le Moenner - Managing Director of A .S.O., organisers of the Tour de France

If you believe you can do anything,  
we’re here to help you do it.

For more great stories of how we help our clients achieve great things with technology 
visit dimensiondata.com/StoriesOfGreatness

Contents

The Economist August 5th 2017 3

5 The world this week

Leaders
7 War with North Korea

It could happen

8 Amer ica’s president and
the Republicans

No deal

8 French reforms

Keep your ner ve

9 Politics in Pakistan

Third time unlucky

10 Housing in Br itain

Rooms for improvement

Letters
11 On Qatar, travel, English,
France, Ronald Reagan,
the young old

Br ieﬁng
13 North Korea’s missiles

Testing, testing…

14 War in Korea

Red lines and bad choices

Asia
17 Politics in Pakistan

A Nawaz-shaped hole

18 Papua New Guinea votes

Continuity, not stability

18 Politics in India

BJP on a roll

19 The Philippines’ drugs war

Narco-consternation

China
21 The armed forces

Shr inking and ﬂexing

22 Waste management

Anti-dumping

United States
23 The White House

Though Mooch is taken,
Mooch abides

24 Tax cuts

Don’t hold your breath

25 College admissions

POTUS v Har vard

25 Maternal deaths

A painful puzzle

26 Media matters

Fox populi

27 Gangs and immigration

A horr ible MS

28 Lexington

Jeﬀ Flake

The Amer icas
29 Venezuela

Democracy done in

30 Brazil

Temer sur vives

30 Latin Amer ican media

English patients

32 Bello

Venezuela’s fantasy voting

Middle East and Afr ica
33 Kenya’s election

The rematch

34 South Afr ica

Hijacked buildings

35 Niger ian verbosity

Get the gist?

35 Israeli entertainment

Carr ie on watching

36 Climate and the Nile

Flood and famine

Europe
37 Sanctions on Russia

The punishment continues

38 Russian relations with
Amer ica

Arming Ukraine

38 The migrants Poland likes

Plugging the gap

39 Urban planning in France

We’ll always have Val
d’Europe

40 Charlemagne

Deutschland is dozing

Br itain
41 Housing

A nation of homebodies

42 Tor ies and construction

March of the YIMBYs

43 Brexit planning

The sucking sound

43 London investment

Reach for the skyscraper

44 Bagehot

A histor y lesson

On the cover
There are no good options to
curb North Korea’s missile-
building. But blunder ing
into war would be the worst:
leader, page 7. Kim Jong Un
does not yet have a missile
that can str ike Amer ica. But
he’s close, page 13. How a
war on the Korean peninsula
could start—and how it
might end, page 14

The Economist online

Daily analysis and opinion to
supplement the pr int edition, plus
audio and video, and a daily char t
Economist.com
E-mail: newsletters and
mobile edition
Economist.com/email
Pr int edition: available online by
7pm London time each Thursday
Economist.com/pr int
Audio edition: available online 
to download each Fr iday
Economist.com/audioedition

Volume 424 Number 9052

Published since September 1843

to take par t in "a severe contest between 
intelligence, which presses forward, and 
an unwor thy, timid ignorance obstructing 
our progress."

Editorial oﬃces in London and also:

Atlanta, Beijing, Berlin, Brussels, Cairo, Chicago,
Lima, Mexico City, Moscow, Mumbai, Nairobi, 
New Delhi, New York, Par is, San Francisco, 
São Paulo, Seoul, Shanghai, Singapore, Tokyo,
Washington DC

Germany A placid election
campaign has failed to
acknowledge the hard choices
facing Europe’s leading
economy: Charlemagne, 
page 40

Russian sanctions Do they

change Vladimir Putin’s
behaviour? Page 37. Amer ica
may at last be willing to oﬀer
Ukraine weapons, page 38

Kenya Another tumultuous
election, with a renewed fear
of violence, page 33

1

Contents continues overleaf

4 Contents

The Economist August 5th 2017

Science and technology
59 Genetic engineer ing

DNA and how to adjust it

60 Holograms

Winging the blues

61 Paying for conser vation

A wild idea

Books and arts
62 Extinction

Not what it used to be

64 Fiona Mozley’s ﬁction

Call of the wild

64 The aspirational class

How to spend it

65 Johnson

Game of tongues

68 Economic and ﬁnancial
indicators

Statistics on 42 economies,
plus a closer look at
purchasing managers’
indexes

Obituar y
70 Dr G. Yunupingu

Singing the land

International
45 Transport

The pr ice of jam

Business
47 Pr ivatisation in France

National treasures

48 Discover y and Scr ipps

Fuzzy signal

49 Drug ﬁrms

Pharma frenemies

49 Proﬁting from the Belt
and Road

Where the twain shall meet

50 European productivity

Le long layoﬀ

51 Schumpeter

King Kong

Economics br ief
52 Human capital

The people’s champion

Finance and economics
54 Phoenix economies

Turnaround stor ies

55 Buttonwood

National balance-sheets

56 Pr ivate equity

Secondar y education

57 Interest rates

LIBOR pains

57 Bitcoin splits

Knives and forks

58 DNA and insurance

The gene is out of the
bottle

PLA As the armed wing of
China’s Communist Par ty
celebrates its 90th anniversar y,
one of Xi Jinping’s biggest
reforms enters a new phase,
page 21

Road-pr icing It has long 

been a good idea. Today it is
becoming an urgent one, 
page 45

France The poor per formance
of the countr y’s state-owned
companies grows ever more
stark, page 47. Emmanuel
Macron has promised to
nationalise France’s biggest
shipyard. He is enter ing
dangerous waters: leader,
page 8

Species and extinction 

The world is in the gr ip of the
sixth mass extinction. It is
also about to see a r iot of new
species, page 62

Subscription service

For our full range of subscription offers, 
including digital only or print and digital 
combined visit
Economist.com/offers
You can subscribe or renew your subscription 
by mail, telephone or fax at the details below:
Telephone: +65 6534 5166 
Facsimile: +65 6534 5066
Web: 
Economist.com/offers
E-mail: 
Post: 

Asia@subscriptions.economist.com

The Economist 
Subscription Centre,
Tanjong Pagar Post Office
PO Box 671
Singapore 910817 

Subscription for 1 year (51 issues)Print only

Australia 
China 
Hong Kong & Macau 
India 
Japan 
Korea 
Malaysia 
New Zealand 
Singapore & Brunei 
Taiwan 
Thailand 
Other countries 

A$465
CNY 2,300
HK$2,300
 10,000
Yen 44,300
KRW 375,000
RM 780
NZ$530
S$425
NT$9,000
US$300
Contact us as above

Pr incipal commercial oﬃces:

25 St James’s Street, London sw1a 1hg
Tel: +44 20 7830 7000
Rue de l’Athénée 32
1206 Geneva, Switzerland
Tel: +41 22 566 2470 
750 3rd Avenue, 5th Floor, New York, NY 10017 
Tel: +1 212 541 0500 
1301 Cityplaza Four,
12 Taikoo Wan Road, Taikoo Shing, Hong Kong
Tel: +852 2585 3888

Other commercial oﬃces:

Chicago, Dubai, Frankfur t, Los Angeles,
Par is, San Francisco and Singapore 

PEFC certiﬁed
This copy of The Economist
is pr inted on paper sourced
from sustainably managed
forests, recycled and controlled
sources cer tiﬁed by PEFC
www.pefc.org

PEFC/01-31-162

© 2017 The Economist Newspaper Limited. All r ights reser ved. Neither this publication nor any par t of it may be reproduced, stored in a retr ieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or
otherwise, without the pr ior permission of The Economist Newspaper Limited. Published ever y week, except for a year-end double issue, by The Economist Newspaper Limited. The Economist is a registered trademark of The Economist Newspaper Limited.
Publisher: The Economist. Pr inted by Times Pr inters (in Singapore).
M.C.I. (P) No.030/09/2016 PPS 677/11/2012(022861)

 
 
 
 
The world this week

Politics

In an extraordinary few days,
even by the febrile standards
of this White House, Donald
Trump sacked Reince Priebus
as chief of staﬀ. His defen-
estration came after Anthony
Scaramucci, the new head of
communications, gave an
expletive-laden account of
why he thought Mr Priebus
was behind a number of recent
leaks. Mr Trump replaced Mr
Priebus with John Kelly, who
had run the Department of
Homeland Security. His ﬁrst
move was to deploy his well-
honed military discipline and
ﬁre Mr Scaramucci. He had
held his job for ten days. 

Preceding the White House
drama, the push in the Senate
to pass a “skinny” bill on
health-care reform failed,
when three Republicans,
including John McCain, joined
Democrats in voting against
the measure. 

Mr Trump signed a bill that
imposes sanctions on Russia
over its meddling in last year’s
election, but which also limits
the president’s power to tam-
per with Congress’s decision.
He described the legislation as
“seriously ﬂawed”. Russia
retaliated by vowing to expel
755 American diplomats. 

The International Olympic
Committee announced that it
had agreed to a deal that will
award the summer Olympics
in 2028 to Los Angeles. The
deal means that the Olympics
in 2024 will be held in Paris,
which Los Angeles was com-
peting against to host that year.
The 1984 Olympic games in Los
Angeles are seen as the most
successful ever, even though

the Soviet Union and many
east European countries boy-
cotted them.

The Senate conﬁrmed Christo-
pher Wray as the new director
of the FBI. 

Passing the buck

Andreas Georgiou, a former
head of national statistics in
Greece, was convicted of a
“breach of duty” by an appeals
court for sharing the full extent
of the country’s budget deﬁcit
with the European statistics
agency in 2009. Mr Georgiou
was acquitted of the same
charge last December. He has
faced various accusations of
swelling the deﬁcit ﬁgures to
beneﬁt foreign creditors. His
supporters say he is a scape-
goat for the Greek debt crisis. 

Turkey’s biggest trial follow-
ing last year’s failed attempt to
overthrow the government got
under way. Nearly 490 sus-
pects are accused of orchestrat-
ing the plot from an air base
outside Ankara. Most face life
in prison if found guilty. Seven
defendants are being tried in
absentia, including Fethullah
Gulen, a cleric based in Ameri-
ca who is accused of master-
minding the coup attempt.

Relations between France and
Italy were at a low ebb follow-
ing France’s decision to nation-
alise the STX France shipyards,
thus cancelling a deal with an
Italian state-owned ﬁrm. The
French and Italian economy
ministers met and gave them-
selves until the end of Septem-
ber to resolve the row.

In trepidation

In Kenya the oﬃcial in charge
of electronic voting was found
murdered ahead of elections
on August 8th. A post-mortem
report said he had been tor-
tured. The murder raised fears
of vote-rigging and post-elec-
tion violence. In 2007, around
1,400 people were killed after a
disputed election.

Hundreds of people were said
to have ﬂed Awamiya, a small
town in eastern Saudi Arabia,
following clashes between the
security forces and alleged
armed Shia militants.

The Economist August 5th 2017 5

for failing to declare all sources
of income. Mr Abbasi is not
expected to last long in the job.
Mr Sharif’s brother, Shahbaz
Sharif, is to contest a by-elec-
tion in September that will
give him a seat in the parlia-
ment with the intent of becom-
ing prime minister. 

Rex Tillerson, America’s secre-
tary of state, told North Korea
“we’re not your enemy” after it
conducted a second test of an
intercontinental ballistic
missile. But Mr Tillerson also
warned the regime that it was
“presenting an unacceptable
threat” and America would
respond. The latest missile
landed in the sea 370km from
Japan’s coast.

Islamic State claimed responsi-
bility for an attack on a Shia
mosque in the Afghan city of
Herat which killed at least 33
people. It also said it had car-
ried out an earlier assault on
the Iraqi embassy in Kabul in
which two people died. 

After a six-week election cam-
paign marred by violence and
several days of coalition-build-
ing talks, the ruling People’s
National Congress party was
returned to power in Papua
New Guinea. 

The foreign ministers of China
and India were due to meet to
ease tensions over a stand-oﬀ
in an area close to their shared
border with Bhutan. In a
lengthy statement, China
accused India of sending
troops 80 metres into its terri-
tory. Altercations over precise
borders occasionally ﬂare up
in the “trijunction” region of
the Himalayas. Troops usually
do not carry weapons there,
and have sometimes resorted
to jostling each other to get the
opposing side to retreat. 

1

China opened its ﬁrst overseas
military base, a port facility in
Djibouti. From there, it will
supply ships taking part in
humanitarian and peace-
keeping missions in Yemen
and Somalia, it said.

A chaotic turn from democracy

Venezuela’s government
claimed that 8m voters turned
out to elect representatives to a
constituent assembly, which
will have near absolute power.
A leaked oﬃcial document
reckoned only 3.7m turned out.
Many of those who did vote
feared losing government
largesse if they did not. The
voting machines were said to
have been tampered with. The
opposition boycotted the vote;
ten people died in protests
against it. America imposed
sanctions on the country’s
president, Nicolás Maduro. 

The lower house of Brazil’s
congress voted not to refer
charges against the country’s
president, Michel Temer, for
trial by the supreme court. The
chief prosecutor had alleged
that Mr Temer agreed to use his
inﬂuence with the antitrust
authority on behalf of the boss
of a meatpacking ﬁrm in return
for bribes. Mr Temer denies
wrongdoing.

Brazil began deploying troops
in Rio de Janeiro to ﬁght
crime. They are to conduct
operations against gangs that
engage in drug-traﬃcking and
looting cargo. More than 90
policemen have been killed in
the state this year.

Keeping it in the family

Pakistan’s national assembly
elected Shahid Khaqan Abbasi
as prime minister following
Nawaz Sharif s resignation. Mr
Sharif was disqualiﬁed from
oﬃce by the Supreme Court

6 The world this week

The Economist August 5th 2017

but it has since restructured. Its
share price has risen by a third
since the start of the year. 

since February 2009 (though
the rate for those aged 25 and
under was 18.7%). 

the total amount it has prom-
ised to buy back over the past
year to $5.5bn. 

Irene Rosenfeld, one of Amer-
ica’s best-known female exec-
utives, decided to step down
as CEO of Mondelez. The food
conglomerate retains the snack
brands of Kraft Foods, from
which it was spun oﬀ in 2012,
and counts Cadbury chocolate
among its assets. But its reli-
ance on legacy labels has
made it harder to adapt to the
appetite for healthier fare. The
new CEO will be Dirk Van de
Put, who currently leads
McCain Foods, the world’s
biggest maker of frozen chips.

India’s central bank sliced a
quarter of a percentage point
oﬀ its benchmark interest rate,
to 6%. It was the ﬁrst cut since
October. Over the past few
months inﬂationary pressures
have receded in India, giving
the Reserve Bank of India
room to ease monetary policy. 

A spr ing in its step

The euro zone’s economy
grew by 2.3% in the second
quarter at an annualised rate,
amid a wealth of surveys
indicating a rebound in conﬁ-
dence and boom in manufac-
turing. The currency bloc’s
unemployment rate fell to an
average 9.1% in June, the lowest

Discovery Communications
struck a $14.6bn deal to buy
Scripps Networks. Discovery
operates documentary-based
channels, such as Animal
Planet and TLC, that tend to
attract male audiences, where-
as Scripps broadcasts program-
ming that appeals more broad-
ly to women, such as the Food
Network channel. The merged
company will have a ﬁfth of
the ad-supported pay-TV
viewership in America. 

Fitch Ratings reported that the
proportion of outstanding
American credit-card debt
that banks write oﬀ as a loss
had risen to 3.3% in the second
quarter, the highest level in
four years. That is far below
the 10% that was being written
oﬀ in 2010, but unlike that
time, mainstream issuers, and
not just subprime lenders, are
taking the hit today. 

Shareholders in HSBC contin-
ued to reap the beneﬁt of its
dramatic turnaround. The
bank reported a solid proﬁt of
$3.9bn for the second quarter,
as revenue grew in all three of
its global businesses. As a
result it increased its share
buy-backs by $2bn, bringing

Make or break

Tesla Motors publicly unveiled
the Model 3, its ﬁrst electric car
aimed at cracking the mass
market. Prices start at $35,000,
but rise considerably for a
version that extends the vehi-
cle’s range in between charg-
ing. The ﬁrst Model 3 rolled oﬀ
the production line in July.
Potential owners have paid a
$1,000 deposit to reserve one
when deliveries start. Mean-
while, Tesla’s plans to mass
produce lithium-ion battery
power at its Gigafactory in
Nevada was about to get some
competition. A recently found-
ed German company, Terra E,
said it would soon announce
the site of a rival plant. 

Other economic data and news
can be found on pages 68-69

Business

Apple’s total revenue climbed
to $45.4bn from April to June,
up by 7% compared with the
same three months last year.
Net proﬁt came in at $8.7bn.
The tech giant also shipped 15%
more iPads in the quarter, the
ﬁrst rise in sales of the device
in years, boosted by demand
in American schools and
colleges. But there was another
drop in revenue from greater
China, notably Hong Kong, a
region where Apple is strug-
gling against cheaper rivals.
Still, its quarterly earnings
delighted investors, helping to
push the Dow Jones Industri-
al Average stockmarket index
over 22,000 for the ﬁrst time.

Closing down the get around

Meanwhile, Apple was criti-
cised by some for removing
unauthorised virtual private
network apps from its online
store in China in order to
comply with censorship laws.
VPNs are used to access con-
tent that falls foul of the cen-
sors. ExpressVPN, one of the
biggest providers of the soft-
ware, said it was disappointed,
but Tim Cook, Apple’s boss,
argued that although he dis-
agreed with China’s position,
the company had to obey
Chinese law. 

There is a new king in the
semiconductor business.
Samsung stole Intel’s quarter-
century title of world’s biggest
chipmaker when its semicon-
ductor unit reported quarterly
revenues of more than $15bn,
beating Intel’s $14.8bn. The
South Korean titan has beneﬁt-
ed from a surge in demand for
the memory chips it produces
for phones and household
gadgets that connect to the
internet. Intel’s main business
is still in computer processors. 

Sony’s semiconductor divi-
sion also fared well in the
latest quarter: sales were up by
41%. However, the main driver
of Sony’s increased proﬁt was
its PlayStation 4 games con-
sole. The Japanese conglomer-
ate was ﬂoundering ﬁve years
ago, dragged down by its con-
sumer-electronics business,

Leaders

It could happen

The Economist August 5th 2017 7

There are no good options to curb Kim Jong Un’s missile-building. But blundering into war would be the worst
IT IS odd that North Korea
causes so much trouble. It is
not exactly a superpower. Its
economy is only a ﬁftieth as big
as that of its democratic capital-
ist cousin, South Korea. Ameri-
cans spend twice its total GDP
on their pets. Yet Kim Jong Un’s
backward little dictatorship has grabbed the attention of the
whole world, and even of America’s president, with its nuc-
lear brinkmanship. On July 28th it tested an intercontinental
ballistic missile that could hit Los Angeles. Before long, it will
be able to mount nuclear warheads on such missiles, as it al-
ready can on missiles aimed at South Korea and Japan. In
charge of this terrifying arsenal is a man who was brought up
as a demigod and cares nothing for human life—witness the in-
nocents beaten to death with hammers in his gigantic gulag.
Last week his foreign ministry vowed that if the regime’s “su-
preme dignity” is threatened, it will “pre-emptively annihi-
late” the countries that threaten it, with all means “including
the nuclear ones”. Only a fool could fail to be alarmed.

ambitions? It is worth trying, but has little chance of success. In
1994 President Bill Clinton secured a deal whereby Kim Jong Il
(the current despot’s father) agreed to stop producing the raw
material for nuclear bombs in return for a huge injection of aid.
Kim took the money and technical help, but immediately start-
ed cheating. Another deal in 2005 failed, for the same reason.
The younger Kim, like his father, sees nuclear weapons as the
only way to guarantee the survival of his regime. It is hard to
imagine circumstances in which he would voluntarily give up
what he calls his “treasured sword of justice”. 
If military action is reckless and diplomacy insuﬃcient, the
only remaining option is to deter and contain Mr Kim. Mr
Trump should make clear—in a scripted speech, not a tweet or
via his secretary of state—that America is not about to start a
war, nuclear or conventional. However, he should reaﬃrm
that a nuclear attack by North Korea on America or one of its al-
lies will immediately be matched. Mr Kim cares about his own
skin. He enjoys the life of a dissolute deity, living in a palace
and with the power to kill or bed any of his subjects. If he were
to unleash a nuclear weapon, he would lose his luxuries and
his life. So would his cronies. That means they can be deterred. 
To contain Mr Kim, America and its allies should apply
pressure that cannot be misconstrued as a declaration of war.
They should ramp up economic sanctions not only against the
North Korean regime but also against the Chinese companies
that trade with it or handle its money. America should formal-
ly extend its nuclear guarantee to South Korea and Japan, and
boost the missile defences that protect both countries. This
would help ensure that they do not build nuclear weapons of
their own. America should convince the South Koreans, who
will suﬀer greatly if war breaks out, that it will not act without
consulting them. China is fed up with the Kim regime, but fears
that if it were to collapse, a reuniﬁed Korea would mean Amer-
ican troops on China’s border. Mr Trump’s team should guar-
antee that this will not happen, and try to persuade China that
in the long run it is better oﬀ with a united, prosperous neigh-
bour than a poor, violent and unpredictable one. 

What another Korean war might look like
Yet the most serious danger is not that one side will suddenly
try to devastate the other. It is that both sides will miscalculate,
and that a spiral of escalation will lead to a catastrophe that no
one wants. Our brieﬁng this week lays out, step by step, one
way that America and North Korea might blunder into a nuc-
lear war (see page 14). It also lists some of the likely conse-
quences. These include: for North Korea, the destruction of its
regime and the death of hundreds of thousands of people. For
South Korea, the destruction of Seoul, a city of 10m within easy
range of 1,000 of the North’s conventional artillery pieces. For
America, the possibility of a nuclear attack on one of its garri-
sons in East Asia, or even on an American city. And don’t forget
the danger of an armed confrontation between America and
China, the North’s neighbour and grudging ally. It seems dis-
tasteful to mention the economic eﬀects of another Korean
war, but they would of course be awful, too.
President Donald Trump has vowed to stop North Korea
from perfecting a nuclear warhead that could threaten the
American mainland, tweeting that “it won’t happen!” Some
pundits suggest shooting down future test missiles on the
launchpad or, improbably, in the air. Others suggest using force
to overthrow the regime or pre-emptive strikes to destroy Mr
Kim’s nuclear arsenal before he has a chance to use it. 
Yet it is just this sort of military action that risks a ruinous es-
calation. Mr Kim’s bombs and missile-launchers are scattered
and well hidden. America’s armed forces, for all their might,
cannot reliably neutralise the North Korean nuclear threat be-
fore Mr Kim has a chance to retaliate. The task would be diﬃ-
cult even if the Pentagon had good intelligence about North
Korea; it does not. The only justiﬁcation for a pre-emptive
strike would be to prevent an imminent nuclear attack on
America or one of its allies. 
Can Mr Kim be cajoled or bribed into giving up his nuclear

Everyone stay calm
All the options for dealing with the North are bad. Although
America should not recognise it as a legitimate nuclear power,
it must base its policy on the reality that it is already an illegiti-
mate one. Mr Kim may gamble that his nukes give him the free-
dom to behave more provocatively, perhaps sponsoring terro-
rism in the South. He may also sell weapons to other cruel
regimes or terrorist groups. The world must do what it can to
thwart such plots, though some will doubtless succeed.
It is worth recalling that America has been here before.
When Stalin and Mao were building their ﬁrst atom bombs,
some in the West urged pre-emptive strikes to stop them. Hap-
pily, cooler heads prevailed. Since then, the logic of deterrence
has ensured that these terrible weapons have never been
used. Some day, perhaps by coup or popular uprising, North
Koreans will be rid of their repulsive ruler, and the peninsula
will reunite as a democracy, like Germany. Until then, the
world must keep calm and contain Mr Kim. 7

8 Leaders

Amer ica’s president and the Republicans

No deal

The Economist August 5th 2017

Congressional Republicans should be braver about acting as a check on the president
THE pact between Republi-
cans in Congress and the
president always looked more
than a bit Faustian. Many Re-
publican lawmakers decided to
cheerlead for a president who
won the nomination by run-
ning against their party, in the
expectation that he would then help them pass the laws they
wanted. They were misinformed. The collapse of health-care
legislation has shown that, despite his boasts, the president is
hardly a master-dealmaker who can help Republicans get bills
through Congress. The defenestration of Reince Priebus, Sean
Spicer and the short-lived Anthony Scaramucci shows that he
also has a habit of rewarding even his most loyal defenders
with public humiliation. This pact is indeed like Faust’s—but
without the enjoyable moments of omnipotence before the
reckoning falls due. It is past time for Republicans in Congress
to strike a new one.

ment on the need to reduce the corporate-tax rate, which at
35% is among the highest in the rich world, though disagree-
ment about how far the rate should come down. This is an area
where a Congress that functioned properly would ﬁnd a com-
promise on its own and send a bill to the president, rather than
expecting the White House to cut a deal on its behalf. The aim
of any bill should be a proper reform, rather than an unfunded
tax cut, hard as that will be (see page 24). Regrettably, the Sen-
ate majority leader, Mitch McConnell, has so far rebuﬀed ad-
vances from the other side of the aisle.
Perhaps Mr McConnell is hoping that Mr Priebus’s succes-
sor as chief-of-staﬀ will bring some order to the Trump White
House. A former general, John Kelly started well by using his
ﬁrst day to ﬁre the bloviating Mr Scaramucci. Yet he must still
cope with the man in the Oval Oﬃce who, throughout his
business career, has made conﬂict and inﬁghting a way of life.
More likely is that the turbulence will continue and that an an-
gry president will set Republicans in Congress the kind of un-
reasonable loyalty test he often imposes on his staﬀ. That
would be the moment when the Republican Party must show
that it stands for more than winning elections.
If Jeﬀ Sessions is sacked, or shunted aside from his job as at-
torney-general, it will be because the president wants some-
one in the job who has not recused himself from the investiga-
tion into Russian election-meddling, and therefore has the
authority to ﬁre Robert Mueller, the special counsel who heads
it. Plenty of Republicans think there is no ﬁre to go with the
smoke that emanates from the White House each time some
new meeting or e-mail exchange regarding Russia comes to
light. Even so, they should recognise that in America the presi-
dent must not be above the law; he cannot simply halt inde-
pendent investigations that he does not like.
In Washington being bipartisan is risky and deeply unfash-
ionable. But it is what the country urgently needs. 7

Medicine, law and philosophy
There are signs that this is happening. After the failure of
health-care reform, blocked by a trio of independently minded
Republican senators, some Republican legislators have oﬀered
to work with Democrats to shore up the Aﬀordable Care Act.
Incremental improvements to Obamacare are far more likely
to succeed in making Americans healthier than scrapping it
and starting afresh.
If Congress can avoid a government shutdown, by approv-
ing a budget in September, tax reform will be next on the agen-
da. Here, Democrats have signalled that they may be willing to
work with Republicans on a bill to get rid of tax breaks while
lowering rates and containing the budget deﬁcit.
That is partly for show. However, there is bipartisan agree-

French reforms

Keep your nerve

State-owned f irms

Employees, 2012, ’000
0
200 400 600 800

France
United States
Germany
Br itain
Japan

Emmanuel Macron has promised to nationalise France’s biggest shipyard. He is entering dangerous waters
THINK of it as a Macron micro
test: the ﬁrst industrial inter-
vention by the man French vot-
ers put into the Elysée Palace, al-
though he had never held
elected oﬃce. 
It
involves
France’s biggest shipyard, at
Saint-Nazaire, on the Atlantic. At
the end of last month, rather than see the yard sold into Italian
hands, the government of Emmanuel Macron pledged to na-
tionalise it instead. A fervent supporter of the European Union
and globalisation, Mr Macron is being accused of nationalism,
protectionism and of trying to shore up his declining populari-

ty. It is not that bad—yet. But Mr Macron should be wary of be-
ing sucked into an industrial policy that sets back his central
aim of making France and the EU more competitive.
Shipbuilding in Saint-Nazaire has a troubled past. François
Hollande, Mr Macron’s predecessor, oversaw a sale of a two-
thirds share of the yard from a South Korean ﬁrm to an Italian
pairing of Fincantieri, a shipbuilder, and an Italian investor. To-
gether, they would have had a 54.6% stake; the rest would have
been owned by the French government and a French investor.
Mr Macron could have let the sale go ahead as planned. In-
stead, after a review, he has ripped the agreement up. He de-
manded a 50/50 split and, when the Italians refused, said he
would exercise the state’s right to buy the lot.

1

The Economist August 5th 2017 

2

The government insists that the nationalisation will be
temporary—it simply wanted to shore up its negotiating posi-
tion before its pre-emption rights lapsed. France would still
like the deal with Fincantieri to go ahead, but it argues that the
Saint-Nazaire yard is strategic, because it supplies the French
navy and it employs several thousand workers. In addition,
the government worries that trade secrets could leak to Fincan-
tieri’s industrial partner, a Chinese cruise-ship builder. 
The Chinese argument sounds specious: it did not bother
the defence establishment when Mr Hollande was in power.
More convincing is the assertion that the French government
should have a greater say over whether Fincantieri moves
work from Saint-Nazaire in a downturn. But that, too, sits awk-
wardly with Mr Macron’s belief in an integrated EU—which in-
cludes Europe’s armed forces and the companies that supply
them. His intervention has already soured relations with Italy,
which smarts at the implication that it is not trustworthy.
This week the two sides set a deadline of September 27th to
reach an agreement. The real danger is that talks fail and that,
for want of a satisfactory buyer, a “temporary” nationalisation
becomes permanent. That risk is all the greater because nation-
alising the Saint-Nazaire yard is popular. A recent poll suggest-
ed that 70% of French backed it, even as Mr Macron’s own sup-
port has fallen, from 62% in May to 54% now, faster than any
other newly elected leader except Jacques Chirac. 
Mr Macron is not one to court popularity. But long-term
state ownership would be as bad for Saint-Nazaire as it has

Leaders 9

been for French industry as a whole. The state’s role in busi-
ness is greater in France than anywhere in Europe, apart from
oil-rich Norway. The state owns stakes worth €100bn ($118bn)
in companies that employ roughly 800,000 people. However,
the Cour des Comptes, the national auditor, noted in a critical
report in January that state-run ﬁrms add value more slowly
than do private French ones (see page 47). The long-term na-
tionalisation of Saint-Nazaire would also invite resistance to
Mr Macron’s plan to sell €10bn ($11.85bn) of state-owned as-
sets, and to use the funds this raises to help mid-size ﬁrms be-
come more innovative.

All at sea
If Saint-Nazaire is a micro-test, the macro-test is approaching
fast. Mr Macron has given himself a deadline—also in Septem-
ber—to unveil reforms to France’s labour market. These will
make the jobs market less inﬂexible, by limiting courts’ free-
dom to order compensation for dismissed workers, and by
putting the onus on unions to negotiate inside companies,
where moderate outcomes are likelier than at the national lev-
el. This week parliament gave the government the power to
change the law by ordinance. The reform promises to be
France’s most important in decades. The more centrist unions,
which are increasingly powerful, accept it. But hardline ones
and leftist politicians will object noisily—and after the Saint-
Nazaire saga may think they have found a weakness to exploit.
Mr Macron must not let them. 7

Politics in Pakistan

Third time unlucky

other democratically elected one—a feat not achieved since the
1990s. Just as important, given the armed forces’ habit of med-
dling in politics, an army chief had retired on schedule on Mr
Sharif’s watch, to be replaced by a general of the civilian gov-
ernment’s choosing. The terrorism that had plagued the coun-
try has abated; the economy is much improved (see page 54).
These hard-won gains are now at risk. Even so, there is no un-
doing Mr Sharif’s ousting, nor should there be.

The courts’ dismissal of the prime minister need not throw the country into chaos
OF THE 25 people who have
held the job of prime min-
ister of Pakistan, not one has
served a full parliamentary
term. Nawaz Sharif became the
latest
to ﬁnd himself unem-
ployed on July 28th, when the
Supreme Court dismissed him
for omitting some income from the declaration of assets he
was obliged to submit as a parliamentary candidate (see page
17). This is the third time Mr Sharif has been ejected from the
post: the president booted him out in 1993, the army in 1999.
The court’s decision to oust Mr Sharif was questionable, to
say the least. It ruled that his incomplete declaration fell short
of the constitutional requirement for MPs to be “honest and
upright”. But that is an impossibly woolly standard, which
could be used to ban almost anyone. Moreover, Mr Sharif’s
lapse—the failure to declare a directorship which carried a
small salary that he did not even draw—hardly seems egre-
gious. The court admitted that the more serious allegation
against him, that he had used his ﬁrst stint in oﬃce to enrich
himself, had not been tested in a proper trial, and thus could
not be considered a ground for his dismissal. Instead, it re-
ferred the claim back to an anti-corruption tribunal.
Mr Sharif’s departure is unfortunate, as it puts an end to a
period in which Pakistan came as close as it ever has to stable
parliamentary democracy. His government had followed an-

Khyber pastiche
On the face of things, the ship of state continues to sail. Mr Sha-
rif’s party, the PML-N, still commands a big majority in parlia-
ment. It has selected Mr Sharif’s younger brother, Shahbaz, as
his successor. The younger Mr Sharif, who is chief minister of
Pakistan’s most populous province, Punjab, plans to stand in
the by-election for his brother’s now vacant seat in September.
In the meantime, the PML-N installed a placeholding prime
minister this week without incident.
Nonetheless, a period of instability is inevitable. Rival par-
ties are wooing PML-N MPs to defect ahead of elections due
within a year. Many will do so if they judge the Sharif family a
liability. Imran Khan, a politician who campaigned doggedly
for the elder Mr Sharif’s dismissal, may instigate a fresh round
of disruptive protests: Shahbaz, after all, has been the object of
a corruption investigation himself, as has the interim prime
minister installed this week. And there is always a chance that
the army might consider the chaos justiﬁcation to intervene in 

1

10 Leaders

The Economist August 5th 2017

2

some way, further disﬁguring Pakistan’s democracy.
Yet, for all the baleful consequences of Mr Sharif’s sacking,
it would be an even bigger disservice to democracy to suggest
that the courts should not pursue corruption cases for fear of
the political fallout, or that the government should ignore the
courts’ rulings. It is hard to paint Mr Sharif’s diﬃculties as a
conspiracy orchestrated by the army, as his supporters would
have it: the case was instigated by Mr Khan, a civilian politi-
cian. Moreover, Mr Sharif himself appointed not just the head
of the army, but also the directors of all the agencies that com-
piled evidence for the Supreme Court. And he could have
made the whole problem disappear by providing proof that
the money his family spent on four ﬂats on a posh street in Lon-
don came from legitimate sources, which he has failed to do
since allegations of corruption ﬁrst surfaced 20 years ago.
But there is much that others could do to minimise the

trauma of his ejection. The judiciary could help dispel the idea
that Mr Sharif is the victim of a witch hunt by allowing a thor-
ough airing of the evidence against him in the trial the Su-
preme Court has demanded. It should also make sure that in-
vestigations of Mr Sharif’s political adversaries, including Mr
Khan, are pursued with equal vigour. The army, meanwhile,
could prove its good faith not just by staying in barracks, but
also by showing the new prime minister a deference it did not
accord Mr Sharif or his civilian predecessors.
Politicians, for their part, should focus not on taking one an-
other to court, but on running the country. The security situa-
tion and the state of the economy must surely loom as large in
the minds of ordinary Pakistanis as the political tumult. If vot-
ers, rather than soldiers or judges, get the ﬁnal word on wheth-
er the Sharif family should remain in power, Pakistan’s democ-
racy might actually end up strengthened. 7

Housing in Br itain

Rooms for improvement

England, median

House-pr ice-to-earnings ratio

How to solve Britain’s housing mess
ON EVERY side, Britain’s pol-
iticians are grappling with
problems of immense scale and
nightmarish complexity. How to
manage the departure from the
European Union? How to help a
crumbling health service cope
with an ageing, weakening pop-
ulation? How to deal with persistent regional deprivation? Yet
one national scourge that holds back the economy and poi-
sons politics is readily solvable—politicians just need to be
brave enough to act. That scourge is the cost of housing.

8
6
4
2
0

1997 2000

05

10

16

Through the roof
The ratio of median house prices to earnings in England hit 7.7
in 2016, its highest recorded level. In the past four decades
house prices have grown by more in Britain than in any other
G7 country. Home ownership has been falling for more than a
decade, after rising for most of the past century. In London
housing is outlandishly dear: before the Brexit vote sent the
pound tumbling, it was the priciest city in the world for renters. 
The cost of housing has knock-on eﬀects across the econ-
omy. As people are forced out to the suburbs, cities become
less dynamic. Workers waste time on marathon, energy-sap-
ping commutes. People from the regions cannot aﬀord to move
to cities where they might ﬁnd work. Businesses cannot clear
land to build. It is perhaps no coincidence that Britain’s grow-
ing housing mess has coincided with stagnant productivity.
All this has fostered a growing sense of inequity. Britons
over the age of 65, a ﬁfth of the population, own over 40% of
the housing wealth held by owner-occupiers. Youngsters with
rich parents can buy their ﬁrst house thanks to the “Bank of
Mum and Dad”. Everyone else must resign themselves to rent-
ing small properties for life, or to continuing to pay oﬀ their
mortgage long after retirement. At the election in June half of
all private renters voted for Labour and Jeremy Corbyn, up
from a third who supported the party in 2010. As home-own-
ership declines, the Conservatives, in particular, are beginning

to worry (see page 42)—as indeed they should.
What makes Britain’s housing squeeze maddening is that,
unlike many other problems, something can easily be done
about it. Britain needs to get building. The consensus is that, to
keep prices in check, it must put up 300,000 houses a year,
double what it erected in 2015-16. Mr Corbyn says the answer is
a huge expansion of public housing, like the one in the Wilson
and Callaghan governments in the 1970s. This would be ex-
pensive, especially if such housing was let at below-market
rates. And few Britons aspire to rent from the council for life.
Better would be to unleash the market. A change to regula-
tions on green-belt land, which surrounds cities and which is
designed to block construction, is long overdue. Far from being
a bucolic retreat, much of the green belt is intensively farmed.
By one estimate, more of Surrey is devoted to golf courses than
houses. Within Greater London enough green-belt land lan-
guishes to build 1.6m houses at average densities.
The government should also cut stamp duty, a land tax lev-
ied on property transactions. Over the long term the burden
has risen, which is one reason why the rate of transactions has
slumped. Abolishing or replacing stamp duty would help
more young families live in decent homes. Oldies could down-
size at less cost, freeing up more of Britain’s 25m or so empty
bedrooms.
And Westminster needs to do away with the perverse in-
centives arising from local-government taxation, in particular
the out-of-date system of council tax, which is levied on hous-
ing. Councils miss out on much of the extra local tax revenue
from new houses, because it is hoovered up and redistributed
by central government. But they are lumbered with the cost of
providing local services for newcomers. That should change.
Councils should be allowed to charge taxes that reﬂect the true
values of properties—and keep the proceeds. 
Economically straightforward is not the same as politically
easy. Even so, Theresa May, the prime minister, has so far failed
to show any mettle over housing. Her government has pro-
posed nothing more than tweaks to a broken system. This lack
of leadership feeds a crisis that is entirely unnecessary. 7

Letters

The situation in Qatar

The ambassador of the United
Arab Emirates to the UN
claimed that the hostile action
taken by the UAE, Saudi Ara-
bia, Bahrain and Egypt against
Qatar is not a blockade, be-
cause “there is no military
aspect to the diplomatic mea-
sures that have been taken”
(Letters, July 15th). 
Qatar’s only land border
has been closed and air and
sea traﬃc has been diverted,
cutting oﬀ vital routes for
imports. Fresh food, water
supplies and medicine must
now be airlifted into Qatar or
delivered by boat. Parents have
been forcibly separated from
their young children and
husbands from their wives.
Family members have been
prevented from visiting sick or
elderly parents. To the people
of Qatar, this is a blockade.
The citizens of the blockad-
ing countries are suﬀering as
well. Hundreds have been
forced to choose between
abandoning their jobs and
families or facing ﬁnes and
even prison for disobeying the
orders. Foreign patients being
treated in Qatar have had their
medical care disrupted. 
As Qatar’s foreign minister,
Sheikh Mohammed bin
Abdulrahman Al Thani, told
an audience in London recent-
ly, “When you have a mother
holding her seven-year-old
child, and they are pulling her
son away from her and not
allowing her to travel with
him, this is a blockade. It is
inhuman. It is illegal. I’m sorry,
but no one can call it a
‘boycott’.”

AMBASSADOR ALYA BIN SAIF 
AL THANI

Permanent Representative of
Qatar to the UN
New York

Around the world in 80 days

I’m sure readers were amused
by the clever headline, “It’s not
the heat; it’s the cupidity”, for
the Free exchange column on
climate change ( July 15th). It’s a
great line. S.J. Perelman, an
American humorist and
screenwriter, coined the
phrase in his delightful travel
chronicle, “Westward Ha!”, in

the late 1940s. Perelman and Al
Hirschfeld, a cartoonist for
New Yorker magazine, were
commissioned to undertake a
round-the-world trip mostly
by slow steamer, presumably
with an eye to replicating the
success of Mark Twain’s “A
Tramp Abroad” more than 60
years earlier. The serialised
illustrated essays were com-
piled and published in book
form in 1947.

JIM RHODES

Nor folk, Virginia

You say potato…

Is Johnson ( July 22nd) being
deliberately provocative in
suggesting that scone is pro-
nounced by Britons to rhyme
with “gone”, whereas Ameri-
cans pronounce it as rhyming
with “cone”? Britain is just as
divided on this topic as it is on
Brexit (or on whether the jam
or cream is spread ﬁrst).

IAN SALUSBURY

Oxford

Keeping the generals happy

Riding up and down the
Champs-Elysées with Donald
Trump and promising to all
and sundry that France will
maintain its operations abroad
is one thing (“Stumbling into a
ﬁght”, July 22nd). Providing the
armed forces with the means
to achieve that is another. Two
groups of people risk being
alienated by Emmanuel Mac-
ron’s latest moves: the armed
forces and the civil servants. 
The president’s desire to
re-establish the journée de
carence, when civil servants
have to sacriﬁce pay for their
ﬁrst day of sick leave, suggests
a certain disdain. Treating the
armed forces and the civil
service in this way risks creat-
ing a powerful enemy
coalition. There are dangerous
signs of Napoleonic ambi-
tions, without the thought
needed to carry them through.
Having assembled a parlia-
mentary majority of largely
inexperienced legislators, the
president seems to be tempted
by the idea of bypassing parlia-
ment and governing by decree. 
A last detail. Mr Macron’s
oﬃcial portrait, which will be
on display in French town

halls, happens to be bigger
than its predecessors, causing
some mayors to protest against
the cost of framing it. La folie
des grandeurs?

ALAN KIRMAN

Director of studies
School for Advanced Studies in
the Social Sciences (EHESS)
Par is

The life saver

Lexington praised the young
Ronald Reagan’s initiative in
getting a summer job as a
lifeguard at a municipal beach
( July 8th). The young jobseeker
had taken a life-saving course
at the YMCA. He gained
employment because the local
authority insisted that the
beach concessionaires
improve safety standards after
a spate of drownings. This was
a case of government showing
it could be the solution rather
than just the problem (some-
thing the 40th president had
forgotten by the time he gave
his inaugural address in 1981).
In his advanced years
Reagan proved the durability
of skills learned in younger
days. Aged 58 as the governor
of California, he dived fully
clothed to rescue a seven-year
old African-American girl who
had got into diﬃculties in the
pool at his house in Sacramen-
to, where a party for staﬀ
families was being held. “I
guess it’s just an old instinct
that remains,” he told the press
when the story got out. 

IWAN MORGAN

Professor of US studies
University College London

Glad to be grey

You asked what to call some-
one who is over 65 but not yet
elderly (“Over 65 shades of
grey”, July 8th). Friends of ours

The Economist August 5th 2017 11

invented the acronym
Hopskis: Healthy Old People
Spending Kids’ Inheritance,
which sums it up pretty well.

LARS HENRIKSSON

Kr istianstad, Sweden

In my early days as a student in
Bournemouth, we referred to
the over 65s as Woopies and
Jollies: Well Oﬀ Older People,
and Jolly Old Ladies with Lots
of Loot. Mind you, this was
Bournemouth.

IVAR HAUFF

Oslo

Being 79, I am in the midst of
“longevity”. Yes, I am an Owl,
Older, Working Less, still earn-
ing; but that also means Older,
Wiser, still Learning.

FATHER EMMANUEL KAHN

Warr ington, Cheshire

I am now evidently able to
refer to myself as a Geriactive,
a Sunsetter, a Nightcapper, a
Nyppie, or as one of the Owls.
But after reading the reference
to the Rolling Stones in your
special report on longevity
( July 8th), I think I’ll plump for
“Jaggernaut”.

DAVID OGILVIE

New York

The English-speaking world
thinks of “retirement”, as
“withdrawal to a place of
seclusion”, you say. But not all
nations share such etymology.
Germans have Pensionierung,
Swedes pensionering, and
Italians pensionamiento, while
Spaniards call it jubilación.

TRISTAN JONES

Chicago

Charles Dickens described the
young elderly as being in their
“green old age”, which is a
wonderful deﬁnition.

META ROSENEIL

Buckhurst Hill, Essex

How about Indy, as in I’m Not
Dead Yet?

BRADFORD HAWKINS

Ir vine, California 7

Letters are welcome and should be
addressed to the Editor at 
The Economist, 25 St James’s Street,

London sw1A 1hg

E-mail: letters@economist.com
More letters are available at:

Economist.com/letters

12

Executive Focus

Improving sight, changing lives

Vision for a Nation Foundation (VFAN) is an award-winning UK charity 
founded by philanthropist James Chen that is improving the lives of people 
with poor vision. VFAN has transformed eye care in Rwanda by providing 
local access to affordable eye care – delivering 2m eye tests. Over the next 
5 years, VFAN has exciting plans to expand its work to other countries in 
Africa and Asia.

VFAN is looking for dynamic professionals with strategic vision, exceptional 
track records and entrepreneurial mind-sets to support its international 
growth.

Head of Programmes
The Head of Programmes will design and manage VFAN’s portfolio of country 
and thematic programmes. They will operationalise VFAN’s 5-year strategy 
and build partnerships with a diverse array of actors, including public and 
private sector organisations.

Head of Fundraising & Partnerships
The Head of Fundraising & Partnerships will develop and execute a 
fundraising strategy to support VFAN’s growth. They will build partnerships 
with institutional and corporate donors as well as philanthropists, charitable 
trusts and foundations. They will also look to identify innovative fundraising 
approaches for VFAN, such as development impact bonds.

Finance & Business Manager
The Finance & Business Manager will be responsible for all ﬁ nancial and 
administrative aspects of VFAN’s work. They will manage VFAN’s assets and 
ﬁ nancial systems, and will play a crucial role in the day-to-day running of the 
organisation.

VFAN offers a competitive remuneration and beneﬁ ts package that includes 
ﬂ exible working, generous pension scheme contributions and annual leave 
allowance. The positions are based in London and involve regular global travel.

The deadline for applications is 5pm on Friday 15 September 2017.

For further information, please visit www.visionforanation.net/jobs.

Controller and Director, 
Division of Financial and Administrative Management

Geneva, Switzerland
Closing date for applications: August 15th 2017

The United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) is one of the world’s 
leading humanitarian organisations addressing the global challenges of refugees, 
internally displaced persons, and stateless persons. It is seeking suitable candidates to 
fi ll the position of Controller and Director of the Division of Financial and Administrative 
Management (DFAM) based in UNHCR headquar ters in Geneva, Switzerland.

The Controller will be the key official responsible for fi nancial and budgetary strategy 
and policy formulation, the production of the statutory accounts, cash management, 
as well as fi nancial change management and related project implementation including 
the development and maintenance of suppor ting corporate IT systems. The Controller 
is also the Director of the Division of Financial and Administrative Management and, 
as such, is responsible for overseeing and supervising the Division which comprises 
approximately 120 staff, located both in Geneva and Budapest.

The Controller directs, administers and controls the Organization’s overall fi nancial 
management systems and par ticipates in the management, decision-making 
and evaluation of programme activities and related budgetary requirements. The 
Controller is also responsible for the application of the United Nations Financial Rules 
and Regulations as well as the application and maintenance of Financial Rules for 
Voluntary Funds administered by the High Commissioner for Refugees.

The Controller and Director of the DFAM repor ts to the Deputy High Commissioner, 
supervises and coordinates the work of the Division, in par ticular the Office of the 
Controller (including fi nancial policy and audit coordination), the Programme Budget 
Service, headed by a Deputy Director (Budget), the Treasury, headed by a Deputy 
Director (Finance), and the Implementing Par tnership Management Service.

The Controller and Director of the DFAM requires a minimum of an advanced 
university degree (Master’s degree or equivalent) in fi nance, business administration, 
accounting or a closely related fi eld and minimum 20 years professional experience 
in an international, decentralized and/or multinational environment, of which at least 
10 years serving in an international capacity, preferably the United Nations and in the 
functional area that is directly relevant to the current position - at Headquar ters level. 
Fluency in written and oral English is essential and working knowledge of French is 
desirable.

For further details on the Job Description and application process, please go to 
http://www.unhcr.org/careers .html by Tuesday, 15th August 2017.

National Taiwan University

National Taiwan University Presidential Search

National Taiwan University (NTU) is a full-fl edged comprehensive university 
with outstanding achievements. Presidential Search Committee now invites 
nominations and applications for the position of President.

Presidential candidates should meet the following requirements: Academician 
at Academia Sinica, or professor, or professional with prior teaching and 
academic research experience equivalent to that required of a professor, and 
at least three years of experience, accumulative, as a director in schools, 
government agencies, or in other state-owned or private business entities. 
The ideal President should be a leader of moral integrity with outstanding 
academic achievements and administrative skills in education. The new 
leader should also be able to administer matters impar tially and beyond the 
interests of any political group.

For those who would like to nominate a candidate, please fi ll in all required 
forms and deliver them to the address below via registered mail, express 
mail, or in person before 5 pm on October 2, 2017. Application dossier will 
not be returned.

NTU Presidential Search Committee
No.1, Sec. 4, Roosevelt Road
Taipei
Taiwan 10617

If you have any inquiries, please call (886)-2-33662035, or fax (886)-2-
23629997. The nomination forms can be downloaded from the NTU Website: 
http://www.ntu.edu.tw

The Economist August 5th 2017

Br ieﬁng Nor th Korea’s missiles

The Economist August 5th 2017 13

Testing, testing…

Also in this section
14 War in Korea

Kim Jong Un does not yet have a missile that can strike America. But he’s close
THE launch of a ballistic missile on July
Nagasaki, to its short- and medium-range
28th, with the range to hit cities on
missiles. But so far, there is nothing to sug-
America’s west coast, provided further
gest that it has yet tested a fusion or ther-
chilling evidence of the speed at which
monuclear weapon despite claims by its
North Korea is developing a capability that
leader, Kim Jong Un, that it has. It is clearly
Donald Trump has declared it would never
working on the technology, though. It may
have. It followed a test of a similar Hwa-
be able to demonstrate this, or at least add
song-14 two-stage missile on July 4th. Both
a thermonuclear element to boost yield,
launches were on a lofted trajectory—the
when it conducts a sixth nuclear test, per-
missile travelling more or less straight up
haps before the end of the year. A thermo-
rather than around the curve of the Earth.
nuclear warhead small enough to be car-
Based on the test’s course and ﬂight time,
ried by the Hwasong-14 could easily have a
analysts believe the ﬁrst missile would
yield of 300 kilotonnes, enough to devas-
have had a normal-trajectory range of
about 7,500km, while the second, which
ﬂew for 47 minutes and reached an altitude
of 3,700km, would have had a range of up
to 10,000km while carrying a warhead
weighing up to 650kg. 
It is too soon, however, to assert that
North Korea is on the brink of being able to
threaten, say, Los Angeles, with a reliable
intercontinental ballistic missile (ICBM). To
do so, it would need to make a warhead
compact and light enough to ﬁt into a mis-
sile’s nose cone. 
Experts, such as Jeﬀrey Lewis of the
James Martin Centre for Non-Proliferation
Studies in California, believe that North
Korea can already ﬁt a ﬁssion nuclear war-
head with a yield of about 20 kilotonnes,
the same as the atomic bomb dropped on

Hwasong-1
4
10,000km

P A C I
F
O C E A

NORTH
KOREA

SOUTH
KOREA

N
1,5
o

d
0

M
u
3,5
s

u
d
0
0
a
k

D
E
T
I

Okinawa

JAPAN

E

T

A

T

S

O
C
I
X
E

M

N
A
C

Hawaii

Guam

A

D

A

o

0

n

k

g

N
U

R

U

I

A

C

H

I

C

I

N

S

S

S

N

A

n

m

m

tate an area of over 70 square kilometres. 
There is also scepticism that North Ko-
rea has yet produced a re-entry vehicle that
would protect the warhead on its path
through the Earth’s atmosphere at veloci-
ties travelled by ICBMs. In an analysis of
the latest launch, Michael Elleman of the
International Institute for Strategic Studies
has examined video from a weather cam-
era in Hokkaido, Japan, which captured
the glowing re-entry vehicle on ﬁlm as it
sped earthwards. As it hits the Earth’s at-
mosphere, it starts to shed “small radiant
objects” and “incandescent vapour”. It
then dims and disappears.
Based on its current progress, North Ko-
rea will probably overcome such problems
sooner rather than later. The latest assess-
ment by America’s Defence Intelligence
Agency, reported by the Washington Post
three days before the most recent missile
test, is that North Korea could have a work-
able ICBM some time in 2018—at least two
years before the previous consensus had
estimated it would do so. 
The reactions to the missile test were
mostly predictable. Two B1 strategic bom-
bers were dispatched from an American
base in Guam to ﬂy over South Korea. A
THAAD anti-missile battery in Alaska, like
the one recently deployed in South Korea,
successfully carried out a test interception. 

1

 
 
 
14 Br ieﬁng Nor th Korea’s missiles

The Economist August 5th 2017

2 In two tweets Mr Trump wrote: “I am very
disappointed in China. Our foolish past
leaders have allowed them to make hun-
dreds of billions of dollars a year in trade,
yet…they do NOTHING for us with North
Korea, just talk. We will no longer allow
this to continue. China could easily solve
this problem!”
A few days later Rex Tillerson, Ameri-
ca’s secretary of state, struck a more emo-
lient note towards North Korea, saying:
“We do not seek a regime change…we
hope that at some point they will begin to
understand that and we would like to sit
and have a dialogue with them.” 
Paradoxically, in South Korea, conserva-
tive opposition parties have called on the
country’s recently elected liberal presi-
dent, Moon Jae-in, to abandon his twin-
track policy of imposing sanctions on
North Korea while still oﬀering dialogue.
Mr Moon wants to see a greater level of
military readiness for anything that might
happen. But, like Mr Tillerson, he is still in-
sisting that he would not close the door on
talks with Mr Kim, should he respond.
Among the options under consideration is
a relaxation of an agreement between
America and South Korea that limits the
range and payload of the South’s conven-
tional missiles.
If the reaction to the test on July 28th
consisted largely of gestures and vague
threats, that is because the options are ei-
ther improbable (constructive talks with
Mr Kim), feeble (tougher sanctions) or terri-
fying (pre-emptive military action).
For all that, fears are growing that Mr
Kim and Mr Trump are now on a collision
course which could result in a war that nei-
ther wants, but which both may ﬁnd diﬃ-
cult to avoid. Rodger Baker of Stratfor, a
geopolitical consulting ﬁrm, says that Mr
Kim wants to prove he has a credible ICBM
capability, while America has to show that
it has the military will to prevent it. He be-
lieves that North Korea would have to re-
spond in some way to an American strike,
even of the most limited kind.
Anthony Cordesman of the Centre for
Strategic and International Studies in
Washington, DC, warns that America’s
ability to deal with all North Korea’s nuc-
lear facilities “is very uncertain”. He adds
that anticipating what the North might do
with its conventional weapons is like “try-
ing to describe a very complex game of
multidimensional chess in terms tic-tac-
toe”. The problem, he says, is that there are
many ways and reasons for each side to es-
calate the ﬁghting once it begins. Stopping
it would be much more diﬃcult.
People with military experience of Ko-
rea “paint a picture that should scare the
hell out of anyone in the US who was con-
templating an attack,” says Jonathan Pol-
lack of the Brookings Institution. “Are we
over-estimating North Korea?” he asks. “I
don’t want to ﬁnd out.” 7

War in Korea

Red lines and bad choices

How a war on the Korean peninsula could start and how it might end
IT WAS March 2019. America and South
Korea were conducting an annual large-
scale military exercise, Foal Eagle, in-
volving nearly 20,000 American troops
and about 300,000 Korean counterparts.
The drill was taking place against a back-
drop of continuing missile tests by the
North Koreans. 
Over the previous two years, the re-
gime of Kim Jong Un had successfully
test-launched several intercontinental
ballistic missiles (ICBMs). The most recent
was another two-stage rocket that analysts
reckoned could reach any city in America.
It carried what appeared to be a credible
re-entry vehicle to shield its nuclear war-
head as it plummeted through the Earth’s
atmosphere towards its target and from
which decoys could be ﬁred to bamboozle
missile defences.
A seventh nuclear test in January had
conﬁrmed that the warhead carried by the
missile would in time be a thermonuclear
one with the power to destroy all life
within an area of 70 square kilometres.
Some intelligence reports had suggested
that the next test the North Koreans would
conduct, likely to coincide with the climax
of Foal Eagle, might include a high-altitude
nuclear explosion of the kind that Ameri-
ca and the Soviet Union had conducted
until 1962 to test their weapons.
Whereas other new nuclear states,

such as Pakistan and India, had been
content to carry out all their testing un-
derground, Mr Kim had boasted since the
start of the year that he would soon pro-
vide ﬁnal proof that would convince the
world to respect North Korea’s nuclear
capability. If the North really carried out
such a test, the electromagnetic pulse it
would cause could take out satellites and
damage power stations on the ground.
For Donald Trump, that would cross a
red line. The moment was now or never.
Responding to claims by Mr Kim at the
outset of what was to become his troubled
presidency that North Korea was in the
ﬁnal stages of developing an ICBM, he had
declared on Twitter, “It won’t happen.” In
June 2017, a few days before North Korea
conducted its ﬁrst ICBM test, Mr Trump
had stated that the “era of strategic pa-
tience” with Mr Kim was over.
Since then, America had tightened
sanctions against the North Korean re-
gime, including taking action against
Chinese and Russian ﬁrms trading with it
and cutting oﬀ sources of ﬁnance generat-
ed by Mr Kim’s criminal networks over-
seas. But with China only willing to oﬀer
token help, it had proved too little and too
late to slow the North’s rapid develop-
ment of nuclear missiles. 
The president had thus far heeded the
warnings of his defence secretary, Jim 

The Economist August 5th 2017

Br ieﬁng Nor th Korea’s missiles 15

calculation by either side. But after bul-
lying from Washington, he had reluctantly
withdrawn his opposition. Mr Trump felt
very strongly that he needed to show his
supporters at home that he could still
make tough decisions. 
To that end, he had asked his military
advisers to come up with a plan that
would show he meant business; powerful
enough to make Mr Kim think twice be-
fore hitting back, but not so drastic as to
trigger war. After all, Mr Kim would surely
realise that to do so would risk entering a
cycle of escalation that would lead inexo-
rably to his defeat and the obliteration of
his dynasty—the very thing his nuclear
programme had been designed to prevent.
The preferred option would have been
to have shot down the missile in its boost
or ascent phase with interceptors ﬁred
from US Navy destroyers. But new SM3-
Block2A interceptors, which might have
been fast enough to do the job, were not
yet ready for deployment. The plan the
Pentagon had therefore come up with was
to ﬁre a salvo of cruise missiles from a
submarine in the Sea of Japan, destroying
the missile on the ground. Much would
depend on getting prompt intelligence
from surveillance satellites and high-
ﬂying drones to hit the launch site before
the missile could be ﬁred. Any subsequent
tests, Mr Kim would be told, would get the
same treatment. A belligerent response by
Mr Kim would be met by an attack on his
nuclear and missile facilities.
Mr Trump was warned, however, that
although Mr Kim was thought to be ratio-
nal, he faced political problems of his own
and would have to react in some way.
According to the most optimistic scenario,
Mr Kim might feel that he could get away
with a gesture, such as ﬁring missiles at the
outer islands, in an operation similar to
the shelling of Yeonpyeong in 2010. He
might also conclude that he could anyway
stop testing for now, as he had credibly
acquired the means to hit the continental
United States. 
The operation appeared at ﬁrst to
succeed. There was little unintended
damage and not much indication whether
the missile had been armed (nuclear
weapons are designed to resist accidental
explosion—the warhead is encased in a
sturdy re-entry vehicle and detonation
sequences have to be minutely timed).
Despite the usual threats from Mr Kim to
“wipe America oﬀ the face of the Earth”
and to turn Seoul into a “sea of ﬁre”, noth-
ing appeared to happen. Mr Trump’s poll
ratings spiked and he tweeted: “Fat Kim
just got what he’s been asking for. SAD!”
Triumphantly, he berated “my generals”
for their caution which had stopped him
from doing something similar sooner. 
But even as Mr Trump was bragging

about the success of the strike, Mr Kim was
ordering elite units from his 180,000-
strong special operations force to carry out
a series of hit-and-run attacks on targets in
the South. Some would inﬁltrate by using
a network of tunnels running beneath the
demilitarised zone (DMZ); others would
be inserted from the sea by mini-sub-
marines or ﬂown in by ancient hedge-
hopping An-2 biplanes that were hard for
modern radars to spot. Meanwhile, North
Korea’s navy had also begun laying mines
in both the West and East seas in an eﬀort
to disrupt trade. A series of cyber-attacks
on South Korea’s critical infrastructure
also appeared to be under way. 

Holding their nerve gas
North Korea’s aim was to stop short of
actions, such as releasing nerve gas in the
outskirts of Seoul, that would prompt an
all-out response from the Americans and
their ally, but to do just enough to generate
a sense of panic and uncertainty among
South Korean civilians. Mr Kim’s advisers
had told him that their analysis, based on
their contacts in the South, was that this
would generate huge pressure on the
South Korean government to veto any
further escalation that might lead to out-
right war. 
That turned out to be a grave mis-
calculation. The allies could not be sure
what Mr Kim planned next, so they had to
prepare for the possibility that sabotage
attacks were a prelude to a major oﬀen-
sive. With that in mind, the evacuation of
foreign nationals, mainly from Seoul, had
begun. These included some 150,000
American civilians, over 40,000 Japanese
and up to 1m Chinese citizens. The evacua-
tion was intended to send a strong mes-
sage to the North that events were devel-
oping a momentum of their own. 
American and South Korean com-
manders had recommended to their gov-
ernments that they should prepare for the
worst. The military exercises already
under way were intended to practice
OPLAN 5015, a classiﬁed scheme drawn up
in response to the growing missile threat.
The drill, they advised, could rapidly be
turned into reality. Whereas previous war
plans had been premised on the belief
that a new conﬂict would be fought along
similar lines to the ﬁrst Korean war (with
large units ﬁrst deployed in defensive
formations before counter-attacking into
the North), the new plan called for preci-
sion strikes and special forces acting be-
hind enemy lines.
The ﬁrst requirement would be to
suppress North Korea’s surprisingly lethal
integrated air-defence system, which
ﬁelds, along with Soviet-era surface-to-air
missiles, the indigenously produced and
highly capable KN-06. With that out of the 

1

Mattis, and his national security adviser,
H.R. McMaster. The risks of taking military
action were too great, they had argued. But
Mr Trump was no longer willing to listen.
Mr Mattis was said to be on the brink of
resignation, partly because he did not
believe that Mr Kim was about to carry out
an atmospheric test. Mr McMaster had
been ﬁred and replaced by John Bolton, a
hawkish former ambassador to the UN
who had been a prime mover for action to
overthrow Saddam Hussein because of
his supposed arsenal of weapons of mass
destruction. Mr Bolton had told the presi-
dent that a high-altitude test was immi-
nent. He had long argued for doing what-
ever it would take to bring about regime
change in North Korea. 
Mr Trump did not necessarily want to
go that far. China’s leader, Xi Jinping, had
warned him that there would be “serious
consequences” if such a step was being
considered. It was not clear whether Chi-
na would step in to help North Korea as it
had in the past (the view in Washington
was that it would not). What was not in
doubt was its hostility to anything that
might bring American forces north of the
38th parallel and close to China’s border.
South Korea’s president, Moon Jae-in,
had at ﬁrst been strongly against any
pre-emptive strike, as his country would
bear the brunt of any subsequent mis-

16 Br ieﬁng Nor th Korea’s missiles

The Economist August 5th 2017

2 way, missiles, smart bombs and huge
“bunker busters” would rain down on
nuclear sites, missile launchers and com-
mand posts while South Korean special
forces carried out “decapitation” raids to
kill North Korea’s leaders. The idea was
that by striking pre-emptively, any war
would be both limited and short. 
The problem was that the commanders
could only be moderately sure that their
plan would work. Apart from the eﬀort
required to disable Mr Kim’s air defences,
an almost complete dearth of reliable
human intelligence meant that there
might be secret nuclear sites that were not
on the target list. Add to that North Korea’s
extraordinarily mountainous terrain and
its tunnelling skills, honed over the past 60
years, and there was a good chance that
some nuclear facilities would remain
intact. In addition, missiles on mobile
launchers could be hidden deep in caves.

An air of superiority
Therefore, rather than press ahead with
OPLAN 5015 immediately, American com-
manders decided that they should bring at
least another 500 tactical aircraft into the
theatre, both from carriers and from bases
in America. They would be needed to
maintain the sortie rate required to de-
stroy North Korea’s air defences and then
hit all the other targets, including both the
ones that were already identiﬁed and also
others that would emerge. Although it
might take a few weeks, it would signal to
North Korea the seriousness of their intent
and might persuade Mr Kim not to press
ahead with a wider attack. 
Mr Kim was aware that time was
against him. At this stage, he too hoped to
avoid an all-out war, which beneath his
usual bombast he knew he might lose. But
the build-up of forces in the South, espe-
cially the rapidly increasing airpower that
would soon allow his adversary to launch
a pre-emptive attack against his most
important weapons, convinced him that
he had to ﬁre a powerful warning shot of
his own.
With over 14,000 artillery pieces, about
1,000 of them positioned in caves and
bunkers within range of Seoul, he could
do a lot of damage quickly. But unleashing
the kind of barrage that his regime had
threatened in the past would take him
rapidly past the point of no return. He also
had to decide how much of his long-range
artillery force of 170mm guns and both
240mm and 300mm multiple-rocket
launchers he was prepared to expose at
this stage to counter-battery ﬁre from the
South. He therefore opted for a limited
salvo that would last under an hour before
pulling back his artillery to positions
where it would be less vulnerable. 
His message to Mr Trump was that this

was just a taste of what South Korea and
its allies could expect if he continued with
his aggressive war plans. It failed to have
the eﬀect that Mr Kim was hoping for.
Despite hints that he might stop there,
with several thousand civilian and mil-
itary casualties already sustained, Ameri-
can and South Korean commanders had to
take action in case this was just the pre-
lude to an all-out artillery barrage.
Based on attempts to model the eﬀects
of such an attack, they believed that in just
a few hours up to 100,000 people would
be killed in Seoul and perhaps many more
if they did not act fast. That meant putting
OPLAN 5015 into action immediately and
with it a warning directly from Mr Trump
to Mr Kim that, if he launched a missile
believed to be carrying a nuclear warhead,
he could expect a swift and devastating
nuclear response that would “remove him
and his country from the map.”
The ferocity of the initial assault
stunned Mr Kim. Large parts of his mas-
sive but technologically crude military
infrastructure started disappearing. Tank
divisions he had ordered south were
sitting ducks in the narrow valleys they
were forced to pass through. Any artillery
that had been left in the open was being
systematically destroyed by witheringly
accurate counter-battery ﬁre. Missile
launchers supposedly hidden in caves
were being pulverised by huge bunker-
busting bombs. Twice Mr Kim had nar-
rowly avoided being blown apart himself,
when bombs had hit command bunkers
minutes after his departure. 
Faced with the imminent destruction
of his regime, Mr Kim decided to go down
ﬁghting. The artillery he had held back

began its bombardment of Seoul. A num-
ber of the shells and rockets had chemical
warheads. Special forces already in the
South were ordered to release poison gas
in populated areas. Rumours rapidly
spread of the use of biological weapons.
Most fatefully, Mr Kim, realising that
his time would soon be up, had made up
his mind to launch what remained of his
nuclear arsenal. He cared little about the
consequences either for his enemies or
his own long-suﬀering people. He lived
just long enough to know that neither of
his two ICBMs had left its launch pad and
three Musudan intermediate-range mis-
siles, aimed at Tokyo and the American
base at Okinawa, had been shot down by
Patriot batteries in Japan before they
could reach their targets. The new THAAD
system and Patriot interceptors in South
Korea had taken care of several medium-
range Pukguksong-2 missiles. But to his
satisfaction, two short-range missiles,
hidden like needles in haystacks among
multiple salvoes of conventionally armed
rockets, had got through to Seoul.

The price of defeat
The initial death toll was put at 300,000,
but the eﬀects of radiation would mean
that many more would die in the months
ahead, including large numbers of Ameri-
can civilians and service personnel. Mr
Trump was advised that he had no option
other than to retaliate with a nuclear
strike on the North. The decision was
taken to use America’s latest nuclear
bomb, the guided B61-12, dropped by a B2
stealth bomber. It was both highly accu-
rate and could have its explosive power
dialled down to reduce civilian casualties
and fallout. At least that was the hope.
After four had been dropped, North
Korea’s war was over. Mr Kim and most of
his high command had been vaporised in
their bunkers, his missile force and nearly
all his artillery had disappeared. Despite
the use of relatively low-yield weapons,
military casualties were in the hundreds
of thousands. Over a million people were
trying to leave Pyongyang, the capital, in
case of further attack. With order breaking
down and food supplies getting scarce,
China found itself facing a humanitarian
catastrophe on its border. It claimed that
lethal radioactive material was being
blown into Chinese cities by disrupted
weather.
Nobody knew how an appalled Presi-
dent Xi would respond. The shock sent
stockmarkets across the world reeling,
foreshadowing a global recession to
come. Mr Trump, however, was un-
daunted. He tweeted: “Nuke attack on
Seoul by evil Kim was BAD! Had no
choice but to nuke him back. But thanks to
my actions, America is safe again!”

Asia

The Economist August 5th 2017 17

Also in this section
18 Another term for PNG’s PM
18 India’s ruling party on a roll
19 The Philippines’ war on drugs
Banyan is away

Politics in Pakistan

A Nawaz-shaped hole

I S L A M A B A D

Who will ﬁll the void left by the courts’ ejection of the prime minister?
ACOUPLE of days before Nawaz Sharif
Sharif based on the report’s ﬁndings. But it
was forced to step down as prime min-
also ruled that Mr Sharif was no longer ﬁt
ister of Pakistan, his most vehement critic,
to be prime minister. He stepped down on
Imran Khan, a former cricket star turned
the same day, leaving Pakistan’s politics in
politician, asserted to The Economist that
turmoil before a general election due with-
Mr Sharif had spent his life rigging the sys-
in a year.
tem. Hell, Mr Khan complained, when
To Mr Khan, the Supreme Court has
they used to play cricket together as young
shown courage and wisdom, but that view
men in Lahore, at the Gymkhana Club, Mr
is self-serving. You do not have to believe
Sharif somehow made sure that the um-
Mr Sharif to be a model of probity to think
pire cried foul any time he appeared to
that the court overstepped its bounds in its
have been bowled out. 
pursuit of him. Other politicians are ﬁn-
Given Mr Sharif’s reputation for canni-
gered in the “Panama Papers”, including in
ness, it is a mystery why, following the
Mr Khan’s Pakistan Tehreek-e-Insaf party,
or PTI, but they have not been pursued
publication in 2016 of papers leaked from a
Panamanian law ﬁrm, Mossack Fonseca,
with the same relish. The court included
he went into bat so nonchalantly to save
two soldiers in the task-force it created to
his own political career. The leak ended up
investigate Mr Sharif, laying itself open to
bringing him down and threatens the sur-
accusations that it was doing the army’s
vival of his political dynasty. The papers
bidding (the generals helped oust Mr Sha-
suggested that Mr Sharif’s children had
rif as prime minister twice before, in the
amassed valuable assets abroad, including
1990s). And it ejected him without ruling
four apartments in an expensive area of
on the nub of the case against him.
London, that seemed unaﬀordable given
his stated income.
Mr Khan seized on the papers, relent-
lessly demanding that the Supreme Court
pursue the matter as the family kept chang-
ing its story and as inconsistencies in its ac-
count grew. The court ﬁrst formed a special
task-force to look into the allegations,
which duly produced a damning report.
On July 28th the court instructed the Na-
tional Accountability Bureau, an anti-cor-
ruption body, to bring a case against Mr

Very ﬁne print
The court’s grounds for Mr Sharif’s dis-
missal were narrow in the extreme. They
had to do with a family company in the
United Arab Emirates, formed when Mr
Sharif was in exile. Mr Sharif, the judges
said, should have declared his income as
chairman on election forms—even though
he had not drawn it. That, they ruled, dis-
qualiﬁed him under a clause in the consti-
tution, inserted during one of Pakistan’s

For daily analysis and debate on Asia, visit
Economist.com/asia

several periods of military rule, that insists
that leaders uphold Islamic virtues and be
“sagacious, righteous and non-proﬂigate,
honest and upright”. The precepts are so
broad as to be meaningless—and wide
open to abuse.
Yet Mr Sharif has accepted the outcome,
and in doing so has probably forestalled
greater turmoil. Indeed, it is not clear that
he believes himself to be down and out.
After all, his party, the Pakistan Muslim
League-Nawaz, or PML-N, still holds a ma-
jority in parliament. Mr Sharif has in-
stalled a loyal placeman, Shahid Khaqan
Abbasi, previously the minister for natural
resources, as interim prime minister.
Meanwhile, a path is being cleared for Mr
Sharif’s younger brother, Shahbaz, chief
minister of the province of Punjab, the
family’s power base, to enter the lower
house of parliament, and then be made
prime minister. That will keep the job in
the family. For how long is another matter.
Nawaz Sharif had seen his daughter, Mar-
yam, as his successor, but she is now be-
smirched by the Panama saga. A degree of
rivalry exists between Nawaz and Shah-
baz, who wants the succession to pass to
his son.
There have been many predictions that
MPs from PML-N will jump ship en masse,
fearing that they will go down with the
Sharifs. That looks premature—and not
only because Nawaz’s allies think he may
ﬁnd a way to survive. The PML-N remains
broadly popular with swathes of Paki-
stanis for having governed relatively well
since returning to power in 2013, not least
by starting to resolve the country’s dire
electricity shortages, and by securing Chi-
nese participation in vast infrastructure
projects. Optimism over the economy has
grown by leaps in the past four years (see
page 54), even though the outlook is now
souring somewhat. What is at stake in this

1

18 Asia

2 political crisis, says Ahsan Iqbal, the plan-
ning minister, is the economic turnaround.
Voters may yet agree with him.
Meanwhile, Mr Khan has yet to con-
vince many Pakistanis that the PTI is ready
for power. It appeals to the young, urban
and educated and has made a decent ﬁst of
governing the province of Khyber Pakh-
tunkhwa. But to gain national power it
would have to recruit dozens of “elect-
ables”, MPs commanding huge vote banks
in Punjab, the richest and most populous
province. Even if it succeeded, that would
tarnish PTI’s claims of probity—its chief
selling point.
Much hinges on what other parts of the
government do now. Should the Supreme
Court—with a history of activism and
even, some say, a “Messiah complex”—
choose to go after almost the entire politi-
cal class, there would be few civilian politi-
cians left to govern. Even Mr Khan has
been hauled into court accused of making
faulty declarations of assets as a candidate,
just like Mr Sharif. For now, lawyers close
to the court predict it will shrink back into
its shell after such a consequential verdict
as this one.
As for the army, few suggest that it is
about to intervene directly in politics, as it
often has in the past. That is certainly a
mark of progress. But it was not shy to con-
front Mr Sharif whenever it felt he was
muscling in on what it considers its turf,
most notably relations with India. It will
presumably be even more assertive with
Mr Abbasi and the younger Mr Sharif. In
the meantime, the army may be happy not
to have to clear up the current political
mess. Only voters can do that. 7

Elections in Papua New Guinea

Continuity, not
stability

A chaotic vote yields a second term for
the prime minister
MARAUDING supporters went on the
rampage with bush knives, candi-
dates were imprisoned and kidnapped
and police stations were burned during
the six-week vote and count in elections in
Papua New Guinea (PNG). On August 2nd
the incumbent People’s National Congress
party ﬁnally declared victory and Peter
O’Neill was returned as prime minister for
a second ﬁve-year term. But the violence
augurs ill for the country’s stability. 
The chaotic campaign reﬂected endur-
ing problems in the political system. Most
politics in PNG is local: the population of
7.6m people speak nearly 850 languages.
Fully 44 parties took part and many candi-
dates ran as independents. All three mem-

The Economist August 5th 2017

ject in the southern highlands, the biggest
private-sector investment in PNG’s history. 
Local themes drowned out national
ones during the campaign. But the country
faces big problems. The violence before
and after the election reﬂects deep social
rifts, particularly in the highlands, which
are riven by tribal conﬂict. A ﬁscal crisis is
also looming. Economic growth fell from
13% in 2014 to just 2% last year, according to
the Asian Development Bank, and govern-
ment debt has been rising fast. This is large-
ly due to the falling price of natural gas,
PNG’s main export. Its timber industry
faces renewed scrutiny too: several foreign
companies recently suspended sales of
products made from Papuan wood over
concerns about illegal logging and ram-
pant deforestation. 
Mr O’Neill now has 18 months before
the opposition can call a vote of no conﬁ-
dence—but they will be far from calm. He
was elected by 60 votes to 46, a smaller ma-
jority than is typical (the vote had to be de-
layed when two men turned up purport-
ing to represent the same constituency).
Most MPs are ﬁrst-timers and in hock to a
small number of inﬂuential ﬁgures. Mr
O’Neill is also likely to face challenges in
court over the tempestuous election that
returned him to oﬃce. 7

Politics in India

Gobble them up

D E L H I

The ruling party is on a roll 
THERE may not have been any elections
for a few months, but the Bharatiya Ja-
nata Party (BJP) of India’s prime minister,
Narendra Modi, is still winning control of
state legislatures. Last week Nitish Kumar,
the chief minister of Bihar, who took oﬃce
at the head of a coalition formed to stop the
BJP, jumped ship—to join his erstwhile en-
emies in a new coalition. Members of the
feckless Congress party, which dominated
Indian politics until a generation ago, are
turning coat, too.
This week Congress’s 44 members of
the legislature of Gujarat, Mr Modi’s home
state, holed up in the Eagleton Golf Village,
a posh resort near Bangalore, the capital of
Karnataka, the last big state still controlled
by Congress. A party leader says they were
ﬂeeing an attempt by the BJP to coerce
them into changing sides by means of
“muscle power”. More likely they are be-
ing protected from “money power” intend-
ed to induce them to defect, as ﬁve of their
colleagues did last week. The inmates at
the Eagleton are free to use the sauna and
the tennis courts, but not their smart-

1

O’Neill tr iumphant

bers of the Election Advisory Committee, a
government body supposed to monitor
election proceedings, resigned in early July
because, they said, they had not been giv-
en enough information to do their work.
One MP who was standing for the ruling
party was imprisoned for inciting unrest in
his township that left three people dead.
There were allegations of irregularities at
the central level too, with reports of ballot
papers being funnelled to the incumbent
party. Patilias Gamato, the electoral com-
missioner, acknowledged that there were
grave problems with the electoral roll and
the conduct of oﬃcials. 
Mr O’Neill took oﬃce in 2011 promising
a crusade against corruption, but did little
to clean up politics. He disbanded the anti-
graft task-force he had set up when it start-
ed to investigate him. During the campaign
there were numerous reports of election
oﬃcers taking bribes to help particular
candidates or favouring relatives. In Port
Moresby, the capital, a returning oﬃcer ap-
peared on TV in a dingy hotel room sur-
rounded by heavies to announce the win-
ning candidate in his district at the same
time as his deputy declared the true victor
to be Sir Mekere Morauta, a former prime
minister who had come out of retirement
to oppose Mr O’Neill. Rival camps attempt-
ed to whisk away new MPs as they arrived
at the airport from the provinces.
In spite (or perhaps because) of such
shenanigans, politics in PNG appears to be
growing more stable than in the past: in the
1980s and 1990s no government even sur-
vived a single term, much less won re-elec-
tion. Over the past decade the commod-
ities boom has ﬁlled government coﬀers
and eased the task of building and main-
taining fragile, if fractious, coalitions. Since
2009 ExxonMobil and its partners have in-
vested $19bn in a liqueﬁed natural gas pro-

The Economist August 5th 2017 

2 phones. In southern India they call this “re-
sort politics”. At least 100 state legislators
from the ruling party in Tamil Nadu were
sequestered at the Golden Bay resort near
Chennai, the state capital, for 13 days earlier
this year, in the middle of a leadership
struggle. 
Even in Karnataka Congress’s Gujarati
contingent felt the long arm of the national
government. On August 2nd income-tax
agents raided the Eagleton, keen to catch a
Congress man with undeclared assets. If
they survive their week between the pool
and the buﬀet, the 44 must return home on
August 8th to help pick three members of
the upper house of India’s parliament.
Two of the seats are bound to go to the BJP,
but Congress hopes to retain the one occu-
pied by Ahmed Patel, a party grandee.
Whether or not he hangs on, his party
has little chance of unseating Mr Modi in
the next national elections, in 2019. After
Mr Kumar won Bihar in 2015 in an alliance
with Congress, he looked like the one
leader who could conceivably beat Mr
Modi in a national contest. At any rate, the
BJP’s defeat in Bihar was by far its biggest
electoral setback since Mr Modi became
prime minister in 2014. Mr Kumar enjoys a
reputation for probity, an appealingly
humble caste background and a record of
getting things done. Last month Rama-
chandra Guha, a prominent historian, sug-
gested that only Mr Kumar could save Con-
gress, by joining it and displacing the
dynastic leadership of the Gandhi family.
Instead Mr Kumar, who has castigated
Mr Modi for Hindu-supremacist bigotry,
has thrown his lot in with the BJP. He be-
lieves the prime minister is bound to win
another ﬁve-year term in 2019. What with
gargantuan Uttar Pradesh, where the BJP
won a state election in a landslide in
March, and now Bihar, almost all the big-
gest states are under the party’s control.
The BJP has also managed to form coalition
governments in smaller states, such as Goa
and Manipur, where Congress actually
won more seats than it did. Just ﬁve of the
29 states are under Congress’s control now,
three of them specks on the map.
Anti-incumbency had been considered

No competition

India, states held (out of 29), year end

BJP and allies

Congress and allies

20

15

10

5

0

2007 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17*

Sources: Election Commission of India;
press repor ts; The Economist

*At August 1st

Asia 19

the norm in Indian politics. Yet the BJP
seems to be marching towards single-party
dominance. Control of national agencies,
including the federal police and taxmen,
comes in handy. So does money. Despite its
avowed desire to reduce the role of cash in
politics, Mr Modi’s government recently
relaxed restrictions on corporate dona-
tions to parties, which may now collect
them without limit and without public dis-
closure. There is an anti-defection law in-
tended to prevent a rich party from buying
the support of members of the opposition,

but it is woefully ineﬀective.
The BJP is eyeing other states. It was the
legal troubles of a senior member of Mr Ku-
mar’s coalition in Bihar that gave him an
excuse to switch sides; an investigation of
Naveen Patnaik, the chief minister of the
state of Odisha for 17 years, may present a
similar opportunity. Some members of Mr
Patnaik’s party may be itching for a better
oﬀer from the BJP. There is even talk of the
BJP broking peace between the warring
factions of the party that runs Tamil Nadu,
to resort-owners’ dismay. 7

The Philippines’ war on drugs

Narco-consternation

M A N I L A

A police raid kills a mayor and much of his family
ARMED police raid the base of a narcot-
ics kingpin masquerading as a civic
leader and are met by a hail of gunﬁre,
which they return, killing the gang boss
and his thugs—Filipinos see such fare at
the cinema and in television dramas all
the time. 
In essence, that is also the oﬃcial
version of events that unfolded in Oza-
miz, a city on the southern Philippine
island of Mindanao, on July 30th. It was
just the sort of action voters expected to
see lots of when they made Rodrigo
Duterte president last year, after he
vowed to wage war on drugs. Instead,
they have mainly witnessed vicious
skirmishes in slums that leave addicts
and petty pushers dead at the hands of
the police or murderers unknown.
The police say that in the middle of
the night, oﬃcers with warrants to search
for illegal drugs and ﬁrearms raided
properties belonging to the mayor of
Ozamiz, Reynaldo Parojinog, or his rela-
tives. Armed men at the mayor’s house
opened ﬁre at the raiding oﬃcers, they
claim, starting a gun battle. Mr Parojinog,
his wife, two of his siblings and 11 other
people were killed, but no policemen.
The mayor’s daughter, who is the vice-
mayor of Ozamiz, and one of his sons
were arrested. Firearms and illegal drugs
were seized, the police say.
The mayor’s name is on a list of oﬃ-
cials whom Mr Duterte suspects of
threatening the fabric of the nation by
dealing in illegal drugs, mainly metham-
phetamine. Mr Parojinog denied that he
was a narco-politician. But the mayor
knew his family’s reputation put him in
the police’s sights. Mr Parojinog’s father
was the ﬁrst boss of the Kuratong Bale-
leng gang, a private army given weapons
by the security forces in the 1980s to ﬁght
communist guerrillas on Mindanao. The
gang later turned to crime, prospering
through robbery, kidnapping and drug-

The minor ity view

running. After his father and elder broth-
er met violent ends, Mr Parojinog became
head of the family, which turned to local
politics. It showered wealth on voters in
and around Ozamiz to win oﬃce and,
cynics claimed, to make it awkward for
the authorities to pursue them.
Many voiced scepticism about the
police’s account of the Ozamiz raids.
Human Rights Watch, an NGO, asked
why security cameras at Mr Parojinog’s
house were put out of action, and said
the vice-mayor had accused the police of
planting the drugs found. But Mr Duterte
scoﬀs at defenders of human rights,
arguing that it is the drug dealers who
show little respect for humanity. The
president was himself formerly the
mayor of a city on Mindanao, an island
tormented by violence committed by
communist insurgents, Muslim separat-
ists, jihadist terrorists, common criminals
and the security forces. A recent opinion
poll found that 82% of Filipinos approve
of Mr Duterte’s performance as presi-
dent, suggesting that they share his view. 

China

The Economist August 5th 2017 21

Also in this section
22 Keeping out foreign rubbish

The armed forces

Shrinking and ﬂexing

B E I J I N G

One of Xi Jinping’s biggest reforms enters a new phase
EIGHTEEN helicopters land with a roar at
“theatre commands”, which are designed
Zhurihe, a military base in Inner Mon-
to assert China’s authority in, say, the
golia. Troops pour onto the endless prairie
South China Sea, as well as Tibet. Mr Xi
in a mock airborne assault, marking, said
also announced that the PLA would be
China Daily, a state-owned newspaper,
trimmed by 300,000 troops, to 2m, less
“the ﬁrst time the People’s Liberation Army
than half the number of 1980 (see chart). 
had presented ﬁghting manoeuvres in a
This year Mr Xi has initiated a second
parade” (troops usually just march up and
phase of the shake-up, which the Chinese
down). Looking on, in combat fatigues,
call “below the neck” reform, aﬀecting
was China’s president, Xi Jinping. The oc-
combat troops, mid-ranking oﬃcers and
casion was the 90th anniversary of the
operational units. In April the defence min-
founding of the PLA on August 1st. The
istry announced that ﬁve “group armies”,
event signalled a new phase in China’s big-
or army corps, would be disbanded, cut-
gest military shake-up for half a century.
ting the total to 13 (a group army has
That shake-up is a case study in Mr Xi’s
roughly 50,000 troops). The PLA, the min-
style of modernisation, and may hold les-
istry said, is being reorganised into 84 un-
sons for reform in other areas. 
its, although it did not say how these diﬀer
The PLA is oﬃcially the armed wing of
the Communist Party. For years its main
jobs were to keep order at home and pro-
tect against an invasion across the border
with the Soviet Union. Now Mr Xi wants it
to project force abroad, requiring joint op-
erations with the navy, air force and other
services. As a government white paper put
it in 2015, “the traditional mentality that
land outweighs sea must be abandoned.” 
Mr Xi took his ﬁrst and biggest step to-
wards cutting the army down to size in
2015, when he changed the PLA’s com-
mand-and-control system. Out went an or-
ganisation based on seven regions aimed
mostly at controlling the domestic popula-
tion. In came ﬁve more outward-looking

China, active armed personnel*, m

1980 85 90 95 2000 05 10

Air force
Navy and
mar ines

Less is more

*Excluding the paramilitar y

Sources: CSIS; IISS

5

4

3

2

1

0

Army

Other 

17

For daily analysis and debate on China, visit
Economist.com/china

from what existed before. The PLA is also
turning its divisions
(roughly 10,000
troops) into brigades, which are smaller
and in theory operationally more ﬂexible.
At the same time Mr Xi has overseen a
big expansion 
in “new-type combat
forces”, especially mobile ones. Last year
the PLA took delivery of its 1,000th heli-
copter, amid much fanfare. Twenty years
ago, the PLA had little more than 100 heli-
copters, mostly for transport. Since then
the number of aviation units has doubled
to 14 and hundreds of attack helicopters
have been deployed. The parade at Zhu-
rihe showed an aerial-assault unit in oper-
ation for the ﬁrst time. (America’s armed
forces still have four times as many heli-
copters as China’s.)
By the same token, until 2015 the navy
had about 12,000 marines. This year there
have been reports of plans to increase the
number to 40,000 (it is not clear by when).
In the mid 2000s the PLA had only seven
units of special-operations forces, the
equivalent of America’s Green Berets or
Navy SEALs. By January that had risen to 11.
These changes have three aims. First, to
create a more mobile PLA capable of pro-
jecting force abroad, not just defending the
mainland. On August 1st China opened its
ﬁrst foreign base, in Djibouti in the Horn of
Africa (though the PLA describes the out-
post merely as a “support facility”). The
second aim is to reduce the army’s domi-
nance. In January a vice-admiral took over
one of the ﬁve new theatre commands—
the ﬁrst non-army oﬃcer to run one of
these commands, but presumably not the
last. The third aim seems to be to make mil-
itary training more realistic, something
that is needed as higher-tech weapons are
deployed. Each group army used to have
very diﬀerent capabilities. But as Dennis
Blasko, a PLA-watcher who writes for the 

1

22 China

2 Jamestown Institute, an American think-
tank, points out, all the group armies dis-
banded this year lacked either a helicopter
force or a special-operations force, or both.
Those that remain all have such units—a
step towards a more standardised and
modern ﬁghting force.
There is a paradox here. The Commu-
nist Party’s power has always been based
on the fact that the PLA is not a normal
army. It is the party’s armed force, not a na-
tional army pledged to defend the state.
This week’s parade reiterated this Maoist
dogma. (The troops even addressed Mr Xi
as “Chairman”, a term rarely used in poli-
tics since the death of Mao Zedong.)
Hence, along with encouraging a more
professional force, Mr Xi has also boosted
the institution by which the party governs
the PLA, the Central Military Commission.
In 2015 the commission took on many jobs
previously handled by military headquar-

ters, such as supervising logistics. This year
its general oﬃce has been upgraded fur-
ther: instructions from it have been given
the status of military regulations.
These reforms seem to follow a tem-
plate Mr Xi also used with the Communist
Party and state-owned enterprises (SOEs).
He begins by criticising the institutions,
calling the party corrupt, SOEs ineﬃcient
and the PLA unsuited to high-tech warfare.
Then Mr Xi reorganises the top brass in or-
der (he says) to break down opposition
from vested interests. Then he moves on to
the lower-ranking bodies, while tightening
his own control.
The diﬀerence is that these changes
have gone much further in the military
realm than with the party or SOEs. Many
observers have questioned whether Mr Xi
will be able to impose more reforms on the
party or SOEs. If the PLA is any guide, he
will certainly try. 7

Waste management

Anti-dumping

rose during the 2000s, the burgeoning
trade in waste beneﬁted both exporters,
who made money from previously worth-
less trash, and importers, who gained ac-
cess to a reliable stream of precious feed-
stock. Between 1995 and 2016 Chinese
imports of waste grew tenfold, from 4.5m
to 45m tonnes. 
But imports of recyclable waste are of-
ten dirty, poorly sorted or contaminated
with hazardous substances such as lead or

The latest crackdown on foreign rubbish will disrupt the global garbage trade
CHINA dominates international trade
in many goods, but few more than
waste for recycling. It sucked in more than
half the world’s exports of scrap copper
and waste paper in 2016, and half of its
used plastic. All in all, China spent over
$18bn on imports of rubbish last year.
America, meanwhile, is an eager supplier.
In 2016 nearly a quarter of America’s big-
gest exporters by volume were recyclers of
paper, plastic or metal. Topping the list was
America Chung Nam, a California-based
supplier of waste paper which last year ex-
ported a whopping 333,900 containers, al-
most all of them to China. 
This may soon change. On July 18th Chi-
na told the World Trade Organisation that
by the end of the year, it will no longer ac-
cept imports of 24 categories of solid waste
as part of a government campaign against
yang laji or “foreign garbage”. The Ministry
of Environmental Protection says restrict-
ing such imports will protect the environ-
ment and improve public health. But the
proposed import ban will disrupt billions
of dollars in trade. Recyclers worry that
other categories of waste may soon receive
the same treatment.
Imports of rubbish have helped feed
China’s voracious appetite for raw materi-
als. It is often cheaper to recycle scrap cop-
per, iron and steel, as well as waste paper
and plastic, than to make such materials
from scratch, especially when commodity
prices are high. So as commodity prices

No longer fantastic

The Economist August 5th 2017

Junk bond

China, waste impor ts, tonnes m

Paper

Metal

Plastic

Other
60

50

40

30

20

10

0

1995

2000

05

10

16

Source: UN Comtrade

mercury. In 1996 factories in Xinjiang inad-
vertently imported more than 100 tonnes
of radioactive metal from Kazakhstan. The
following year an American businessman
was convicted of smuggling over 200
tonnes of unsorted rubbish labelled as
waste paper. Even when the intended ma-
terial is imported, it is often recycled im-
properly. In 2002 the authorities faced
widespread criticism after a documentary
showed workers in Guangdong province
crudely dismantling discarded electronic
devices and dumping the toxic remains
into a river. Oﬃcials may have been
spurred into the latest restrictions by the re-
lease of Plastic China, an unﬂattering docu-
mentary about the plastic-recycling indus-
try which was screened at Sundance, a
grand American ﬁlm festival, in January.
The government had already been
campaigning to block imports of illegal
and low-quality waste under a crackdown
called Operation Green Fence launched in
2013. Customs oﬃcials have ramped up in-
spections of scrap metal for circuit boards,
plastic for syringes and other medical
waste, and waste paper for plastic or
wood. Since then, China’s imports of
waste have fallen sharply (see chart).
Whereas Green Fence was aimed at im-
proving the quality of imported waste, the
government’s latest move bans several
types of waste outright, threatening some
$5bn in trade. The Ministry of Environ-
mental Protection says the ban will cut pol-
lution. But most of the waste consumed by
China’s recycling industry comes from do-
mestic sources, not imports, notes Joshua
Goldstein of the University of Southern
California: “This is not really where the
problem lies.” Indeed, recyclers who rely
on imports may now switch to grubbier
domestic stock.
“This is going to be very hard on our in-
dustry,” says Adina Renee Adler of the In-
stitute of Scrap Recycling Industries. As it
is, Operation Green Fence has put lots of
small recyclers out of business. Exporters
will suﬀer too. Derek Kellenberg of the Uni-
versity of Montana says, “My suspicion is
that the lower-quality stuﬀ is more likely to
end up in a landﬁll.” 7

United States

The revolving White House door

Though Mooch is taken, Mooch abides

W A S H I N G T O N , D C

A new chief of staﬀ aims to bring order to a chaotic White House. Good luck
ANTHONY SCARAMUCCI’S tenure as
dent’s son-in-law and daughter, Jared
White House communications direc-
Kushner and Ivanka Trump, suspected
tor lasted just ten days—shorter than any-
both men of insuﬃcient loyalty. 
one other than the German-born John
Mr Scaramucci was a much Trumpier
Koehler, whose admission that he took
ﬁgure—a nattily dressed, self-made mil-
part in a Hitler Youth programme he de-
lionaire from Long Island just as brash and
scribed as “the Boy Scouts run by the Nazi
inexperienced as his boss. Unfortunately,
Party” triggered his resignation about a
he was spectacularly bad at his job. Most
week after Ronald Reagan had appointed
communications directors operate behind
him. Mr Scaramucci was also the last of
the scenes, working out how best to craft
three White House aides to leave in ten tu-
the president’s message and rally support.
multuous days. Sean Spicer resigned as
Mr Scaramucci gave an interview to a New
press secretary rather than report to Mr
Yorker reporter in which he called Mr Prie-
Scaramucci who, unlike Mr Spicer, had no
bus, who was nominally his boss, “a fuck-
previous experience in political communi-
ing paranoid schizophrenic” and claimed
cation. A week later President Donald
Steve Bannon, Mr Trump’s paleo-conser-
Trump replaced Reince Priebus, the chief
vative chief adviser, performed a physi-
of staﬀ, with John Kelly, a retired Marine
cally unlikely act of self-pleasure. Mr Kelly
general who had been serving as home-
was hired to bring discipline and order to a
land security secretary. 
leaky, fractious, chaotic White House; few
Many in Mr Trump’s orbit have wel-
were surprised when he got rid of Mr Sca-
comed all three departures. Mr Trump likes
ramucci just hours after being sworn in.
relatives and people personally loyal to
But from here his mission gets harder.
him, while Messrs Spicer and Priebus rose
through Republican Party ranks. Mr Prie-
bus, a dogged, earnest Wisconsinite who
last autumn allegedly pressed Mr Trump to
drop out of the presidential race after an
old tape surfaced of him bragging about
grabbing women’s genitals, never won Mr
Trump’s respect. Mr Spicer had ceded
press-brieﬁng duties to his deputy, Sarah
Huckabee Sanders; he reportedly grew
tired of Mr Trump’s needling. The presi-

Kelly’s slate
Mr Kelly comes from one of the only two
groups of people the president seems to re-
spect: billionaires and generals. He has ex-
perience dealing with Congress: he was
the Marines’ liaison to the House of Repre-
sentatives for four years in the late-1990s, a
perch from which he saw up close Newt
Gingrich’s tumultuous reign as Speaker of
the House of Representatives, and was

The Economist August 5th 2017 23

Also in this section
24 Will Republicans cut taxes?
25 Aﬃrmative action at the Ivies
25 The maternal-mortality myster y
26 Trusting in Trump
27 Gangs and immigration
28 Lexington: Jeﬀ Flake

For daily analysis and debate on Amer ica, visit
Economist.com/unitedstates
Economist.com/blogs/democracyinamer ica

also legislative aide to the Marines’ com-
mandant in the mid-2000s. And he has
run a large, unwieldy organisation as head
of the US Southern Command, which
oversees all American military activity in
Central and South America.
Whereas Mr Trump used to belittle Mr
Priebus, he has given Mr Kelly traditional
chief-of-staﬀ authority. Ms Sanders af-
ﬁrmed that senior White House oﬃcials,
including Messrs Kushner and Bannon,
will report to him rather than to the presi-
dent, as was the case under Mr Priebus. Mr
Kelly’s ascent may have empowered other
generals in the administration. This week
H.R. McMaster, the national-security ad-
viser, sacked Ezra Cohen-Watnick, the se-
nior director for intelligence, who he had
tried and failed to ﬁre in March.
How long that authority will last is un-
clear. Mr Trump encourages factionalism
and competition among his underlings. In
the Marines Mr Kelly could punish the in-
subordinate. Will he be able to do the same
to recalcitrant aides—especially those such
as Mr Kushner and Ms Trump, who are also
family? Mr Kelly will certainly not be able
to get Mr Trump to cede control of his Twit-
ter account, and message discipline only
goes so far when the messenger himself is
undisciplined. “The problem,” says Peter
Wehner, who worked in the previous three
Republican administrations, “is funda-
mentally in the disordered mind and per-
sonality of President Trump.”
After six months in oﬃce, Mr Trump
still does not have a big legislative achieve-
ment, despite Republican majorities in
both houses of Congress. That is less the
fault of leakers or an undisciplined White
House staﬀ than unsquareable policy cir-
cles (Republicans who believe the govern-
ment should get out of the health-care
business will never agree with those who 

1

24 United States

The Economist August 5th 2017

2 view health care as a right) and an increas-
ingly poisonous relationship with congres-
sional Republicans. 
In the wake of his health-care defeat,
the president has harangued Republican
senators on Twitter. John McCain took to
the Senate ﬂoor to remind his colleagues,
“We are not the president’s subordinates.
We are his equal.” Mr McCain’s fellow-Ari-
zonan in the Senate, Jeﬀ Flake, has released
a book about the danger that Trumpism
poses to conservatism (see Lexington). Per-
haps Mr Kelly will be able to smooth some
ruﬄed feathers, but the chorus of com-
plaints sounds less like bruised egos than
long-standing private distaste for Mr
Trump at last coming into the open.
Mr Trump’s attempts to govern via
Twitter do not help. On July 26th, for in-
stance, he tweeted that the armed forces
“will not accept or allow transgender indi-
viduals to serve in any capacity.” But he did
not consult military chiefs or the secretary
of defence, and released no implementa-
tion plan. The generals said they would
not enact his order without guidance on
how to implement it.
The president’s Twitter attacks on Jeﬀ
Sessions, his attorney-general, with whom
he is furious for recusing himself from Rus-
sia-related investigations, have quietened
down for the moment. They provoked out-
rage from some usually supportive com-
mentators, as well as Mr Sessions’s former
colleagues in the Senate. 
Ms Sanders denied rumours that Mr
Sessions would move to the now-vacant
post of homeland security, which would
allow Mr Trump to appoint a more compli-
ant attorney-general. Lindsey Graham, a
Republican senator from South Carolina,
warned of “holy hell to pay” if Mr Sessions
is ﬁred, while Chuck Grassley, who heads
the Senate Judiciary Committee, warned
that no new attorney-general would be
conﬁrmed this year. The transgender ban,
attacks on Mr Sessions and high-handed
treatment of Republican legislators all
came from Mr Trump himself.
Most alarming for anyone hoping that
Mr Kelly can right the ship is Mr Trump’s
habit of disregarding advice. On July 31st
the Washington Post reported that last
month he deﬁed his counsellors and law-
yers to dictate personally a misleading
statement about a meeting with a Russian
lawyer released under his son’s name. (Mr
Trump’s lawyer denied the report, but Ms
Sanders said Mr Trump “weighed in as any
father would”.) That evinces not poor staﬀ
control, but Mr Trump’s questionable po-
litical, strategic and moral instincts.
Throughout Mr Trump’s campaign and
presidency, supporters have said he would
soon moderate his behaviour. It never hap-
pened: Mr Trump is who he is. Mr Kelly
may successfully impose order on the low-
er ranks. But even the best generals cannot
discipline their commander-in-chief. 7

Tax cuts

Don’t hold your breath

W A S H I N G T O N , D C

Cutting taxes sounds easy. It isn’t
STEVE MNUCHIN, the treasury secre-
tary, once expected to have passed tax
reform by now. The Republicans’ tortuous
and ultimately doomed struggle to reform
health care put paid to that goal. Yet the
Trump administration still promises to cut
taxes in 2017, and Republicans in Congress
are desperate to show that their control of
the legislature is worth something. On July
27th leaders from Congress and the White
House announced they had agreed on the
“principles” of tax reform. Four days later,
the White House set out an “aggressive”
timetable to pass a bill through the House
in October and the Senate in November.
Yet Republicans are not as united as they
seem on tax policy. Their plans will proba-
bly go the way of Mr Mnuchin’s earlier
schedule—and could even meet the same
fate as their health-care bill.
Tax “reform” is probably a misnomer.
The last true reform, in 1986, under Ronald
Reagan, reduced tax rates without losing
revenue by eliminating swathes of tax de-
ductions. Crucially, it was a bipartisan ef-
fort, which made it easier for Congress to
take on the interest groups which avidly
defend the beneﬁts they gain from carve-
outs. Despite apparent overtures from
both sides, there is little serious hope of
cross-party co-operation this time, because
Democrats would extract too high a price.
For example, they insist that the wealthiest
1% of Americans must not see any tax
cuts—a demand that clashes with all recent
comprehensive conservative plans.
Acting alone, Republicans are unlikely

Check your sums

United States, ten-year impact on government
revenue, based on 2016-25 budget window*

$trn

Individual taxes

Impact:

Negative

Positive

3

2

1

–

0

+

1

2

Eliminate deduction
for state & local taxes

Eliminate estate tax

Income-tax brackets
of 10%, 25% & 30%

Business taxes

Eliminate deductibility
of interest payments
25% rate for
pass-through f irms
25% rate for
corporations
Full investment
expensing

Source: Tax Foundation

*Excludes impact on GDP growth

to broaden the tax base much. The admin-
istration has shown little appetite to take
on the most expensive and distorting tax
breaks: those for mortgage interest and em-
ployer-provided health insurance, and, for
corporations, a deduction for debt interest.
All three are defended by ﬁerce lobbies.
The only deduction that seems ﬁrmly in
the administration’s sights is for state and
local taxes, which mainly beneﬁts resi-
dents of high-tax Democratic states such as
California and New York. Tax-cutters rail
against the corporate-tax system for fa-
vouring particular industries. But the big-
gest such breaks go to domestic manufac-
turers and oil and gas producers. President
Donald Trump seems unlikely to want ei-
ther scrapped. With their new principles,
the Republicans’ potential tax base actual-
ly shrank, because they ruled out a contro-
versial but lucrative “border adjustment”
to the corporate tax, which would have
taxed imports and subsidised exports. 
That makes a tricky task trickier. To pass
a tax bill by themselves, Republicans will
need ﬁrm discipline. Senate procedure al-
lows tax legislation to pass with just 51
votes, but only once a budget is in place.
Passing a budget means deciding in ad-
vance whether—and to what extent—tax
cuts will be paid for. If they are unfunded,
the budget must waive Senate rules pre-
venting bills from adding to deﬁcits (even
then, unfunded tax cuts could probably
only last ten years). Republicans would
also need to circumvent a law, signed by
Barack Obama in 2010, that triggers auto-
matic spending cuts to plug any shortfall.
These would fall on programmes includ-
ing Medicare, health insurance for the old,
which Mr Trump has pledged to protect.
Early drafts of the budget in the House
of Representatives would not increase def-
icits. But ﬁghts have broken out over how
to make the books balance. To pay for tax
cuts, conservatives are proposing cuts to
entitlement spending, worth $200bn over
a decade, that more moderate Republicans
cannot stomach. As a result, the budget is
already behind schedule. It could be fur-
ther delayed by a row over the debt ceiling,
which must be raised in October. If so, the
timetable for tax reform will slip, too.
If they are constrained by a thrifty bud-
get, Republicans in Congress will ﬁnd it
hard to deliver the big tax cuts they pro-
mise. Mr Trump wants all ﬁrms to pay no
more than a 15% rate, to lower income taxes
across the board and to eliminate the estate

1

The Economist August 5th 2017 

2 (inheritance) tax. Together these changes
would cost over $5trn, before accounting
for their eﬀect on economic growth, ac-
cording to the Tax Foundation, a right-lean-
ing think-tank. Abolishing the state and lo-
cal deduction raises only $1.8trn. A little
more money—perhaps
$260bn—might
come from taxing proﬁts that ﬁrms have
stashed overseas. Yet this would be a one-
oﬀ windfall that could ﬁnance only a two-
or three-percentage-point reduction in the
corporate rate for a decade.
Congress could square the circle by di-
recting budget scorekeepers to assume that
tax cuts spark much higher economic
growth. But although most congressional
Republicans support such “dynamic scor-
ing”, they have little appetite for complete-
ly fanciful analysis, says Andy Laperriere
of Cornerstone Macro, a consultancy. A
credible dynamic score would still leave a
large funding gap. 
The upshot is that modest, permanent
tax cuts, ﬁnanced by scrapping the state
and local deduction, are achievable. In iso-
lation, such a reform could even fulﬁl Mr
Mnuchin’s pledge not to cut income tax for
the highest earners (who also pay the most
to state and local governments). Such a
policy might be combined with temporary
business-tax cuts that balloon the deﬁcit
and beneﬁt the rich. But that would require
advanced planning in the budget and a
careful legislative strategy. Firms should
not bank on it. 7

College admissions

POTUS v Harvard

N EW Y O R K

The Department of Justice targets
race-conscious admissions at the Ivies
UNDER Jeﬀ Sessions, the attorney-gen-
eral, Donald Trump’s Department of
Justice (DoJ) has abandoned voting-rights
litigation, tried to punish sanctuary cities,
cracked down on undocumented immi-
grants, revoked sentencing reforms and ar-
gued that civil-rights laws do not protect
gays and lesbians from employment dis-
crimination. Now the DoJ is entering the
fray on aﬃrmative action. It is recruiting
lawyers to investigate a complaint that
Harvard University’s pursuit of campus
diversity comes at the expense of Asian-
Americans. 
After whites, who constitute about half
of Harvard’s student body, Asians are the
largest demographic group, accounting for
22% of the class arriving on campus later
this month. But a lawsuit ﬁled in 2014 by
Edward Blum—architect of six race-tinged
Supreme Court cases—says their share
should be higher. He claims that Harvard’s

United States 25

If the DoJ is using the Harvard suit as a
ﬁrst step towards a wider-ranging investi-
gation, it will be constrained, for now, by
the Supreme Court’s narrow endorsement
of admissions policies beneﬁting blacks
and Hispanics. Since 1978, the court has
said that while quotas are unconstitution-
al, universities seeking “the educational
beneﬁts that ﬂow from an ethnically di-
verse student body” may consider race. 
Last year Justice Anthony Kennedy
wrote the majority opinion in a case re-
buﬃng a woman who complained that be-
ing white cost her admission to Texas’s ﬂag-
ship public university, where race is a
modest factor in admitting a quarter of the
student body. Universities are “laborato-
ries for experimentation”, Justice Kennedy
wrote. They are owed “considerable defe-
rence” in deﬁning “intangible characteris-
tics, like student body diversity.” But, he
added, they must strive “to reconcile the
pursuit of diversity with the constitutional
promise of equal treatment and dignity.”
The 81-year-old Justice Kennedy, whose
vote upheld race-aware admissions last
year, told prospective applicants for clerk-
ships that he is considering retirement in
2018. If he hangs up his robe, his replace-
ment will almost certainly share the four-
justice conservative bloc’s distaste for
aﬃrmative action. That means the DoJ’s
campaign against racial preferences may
face a friendly majority by the time its law-
suits reach the Supreme Court. 7

Maternal deaths

A painful puzzle

Is pregnancy in America much deadlier
than in other rich countries? 
FEW things are more tragic than the
death of a woman in pregnancy or
childbirth. In America, as in other rich
countries, such deaths are extremely rare.
An American woman is more likely to be
struck by lightning than to die in childbirth.
Nonetheless, 700-800 pregnant women
and new mothers die each year. By some
measures, America’s maternal mortality is
several times higher than in rich European
countries. By other measures, however,
America has the same rate as Britain.
One bit of the puzzle is what counts as a
maternal death. The standard deﬁnition
used in international comparisons, such as
those published by the World Health Orga-
nisation, is a death from complications of
pregnancy if the death occurs between the
time a woman becomes pregnant and six
weeks after her pregnancy ends.
In rich countries, these deaths are tal-
lied from vital-registration systems which 

1

What quotas?

“holistic” admissions policy disguises “the
fact that it holds Asian-Americans to a far
higher standard than other students and
essentially forces them to compete against
each other for admission”. Harvard’s ad-
missions policy is “a ﬁgleaf”, he says, “to
hide, dissemble and obfuscate racial bal-
ancing and quotas.”
In May 2015, 64 Asian-American organi-
sations ﬁled a complaint to this eﬀect with
the DoJ. The 50-page document argued
that Asian applicants to Harvard “have
67% lower odds of admission than white
applicants with comparable test scores”
and, on the SAT, need 140 more points than
whites, 270 more than Hispanics and 450
more than blacks to have the same chance
of getting in. The groups cited Harvard’s
“remarkable” stability in acceptance rates
for Asians and juxtaposed it with the
group’s steadily rising share of Harvard’s
applicant pool. They claim this mismatch,
along with ﬂat acceptance lines for other
demographic groups, suggests that Har-
vard seeks “proportional representation of
the various racial and ethnic groups pre-
sent in Harvard’s student body”.
On August 2nd Sarah Isgur Flores, a DoJ
spokesperson, said that the Obama ad-
ministration had 
left
this
complaint
against Harvard “unresolved” and that the
civil-rights division of the oﬃce was seek-
ing volunteers to reopen it. Ms Flores also
corrected what she called “inaccurate”
press reports of an internal DoJ memo that
the department was about to launch an in-
vestigation of “university admissions in
general”. Excerpts from the memo pub-
lished by the New York Times a day earlier
had suggested that the DoJ would look into
and litigate “intentional race-based dis-
crimination in college and university ad-
missions”—a rather open-ended mission.

26 United States

The Economist August 5th 2017

Media matters

Fox populi

2

in turn compile data from death certiﬁ-
cates. These, however, are known to un-
dercount maternal deaths, partly because
doctors must select a cause of death from
thousands of codes. They are more likely
to consider the subset reserved for medical
problems caused by pregnancy when the
form has a checkbox asking whether the
woman had been pregnant. 
America added this checkbox to its
standard death certiﬁcate in 2003, though
it took more than a decade for all states to
adopt it. It has been a mixed blessing, says
Andreea Creanga of Johns Hopkins Uni-
versity. A recent study found that its grow-
ing use accounted for 80% of the steep rise
in maternal mortality recorded in 2000-14.
Although many maternal deaths that
would otherwise go unrecorded are now
tallied thanks to the checkbox, it is also of-
ten marked erroneously—showing recent
pregnancy on the death certiﬁcates of
women who died in their 50s, for example. 
According to data from death certiﬁ-
cates, America’s rate is 21 maternal deaths
per 100,000 live births. In Britain, which
does not use the pregnancy checkbox, the
rate is four to ﬁve times lower. It is a rate
that British health authorities do not con-
sider reliable.
Because death certiﬁcates do a poor job
in identifying maternal deaths, some
countries, including America, Britain and
France, use alternative systems to track ma-
ternal mortality. These systems cast a wide
net to ﬁnd all deaths that might count as
maternal. They gather reports from hospi-
tals, coroners, newspapers and even tips
from ordinary citizens. Experts review the
medical records for all deaths that are
found. Only those that are clearly a result
of health problems caused by pregnancy
are tallied as maternal deaths. If the chain
of events that led to a woman’s death start-
ed with asthma, for example, the death
would be included only if the pregnancy
caused the asthma or made it worse. 
In America this type of detailed system,
run by the Centres for Disease Control and
Prevention (CDC), counts maternal deaths
that occur up to a year after pregnancy.
(Deaths resulting from pregnancy, such as
suicides caused by post-partum depres-
sion, can strike many months after deliv-
ery.) By that measure, America’s maternal
mortality rate in 2011-13 (the latest period
for which data have been published) was
17 deaths per 100,000 live births. Maternal
deaths tallied in the same way in Britain for
2012-14 result in a mortality rate that is al-
most exactly the same. 
Britain’s system is better at detecting
maternal deaths, if only because Ameri-
ca’s system relies on adding up numbers
from 50 states with varying capacity for
the task of collecting data. What is clear,
however, is that nobody really knows just
how much riskier pregnancy in America
may be than in other rich countries. 7

60
50
40
30
20
10
0

United States, “Do you favour or oppose permitting
the cour ts to shut down or f ine news media outlets
for publishing or broadcasting stor ies that are
biased or inaccurate?”, % polled*
Democrat
Independent
Shut down
Fine

Republican

60
50
40
30
20
10
0

Freedom from the press

Attitudes towards the mainstream media take an unconstitutional turn
IT IS long-standing Republican tradition
to deride the national media for its
liberal tendencies. Despite that, the
words of Lamar Smith, a Republican
representative from Texas, delivered four
days into Donald Trump’s presidency on
the ﬂoor of the House of Representatives,
managed to stand out. “Better to get your
news directly from the president,” he told
his colleagues. “In fact, it might be the
only way to get the unvarnished truth.”
Across the country Republicans seem to
be taking the edict to heart.
The Economist asked YouGov, our
pollster, to survey 1,500 Americans about
the trust they placed in the president
compared with national media outlets.
When Republicans were asked whether
they trusted Mr Trump more than the
New York Times, the Washington Post or
CNN, at least 70% sided with the presi-
dent each time. Less than 15% chose the
media outlet (the rest were unsure).
Republicans also preferred Trump
truths over the Weekly Standard and the
National Review, conservative magazines
with impressive intellectual pedigrees.
Only with Fox News, the administra-
tion’s preferred outlet, were Republicans
somewhat torn: 23% said they trusted the
network more, compared with 54% who
stuck with Mr Trump. 
Media trust was not high among
Republicans to begin with. But YouGov
also polled Americans in mid-October
about their preferences, making it pos-
sible to measure how much their trust
has eroded since Mr Trump’s election.
Distrust in the Washington Post and New

Sources: YouGov; The Economist

Favour

Oppose

Favour Oppose

*July 23rd-25th 2017

York Times, the papers that have served
up the most caloriﬁc scoops during the
Trump presidency, is up by seven and
nine points respectively among Repub-
licans. The numbers for Fox News, the
only outlet trusted by a majority of Re-
publicans, were unchanged. 
Much of that may be the work of Mr
Trump’s constant hammering and ha-
ranguing. The president, who reportedly
watches hours of television a day, oﬀers
his 35m followers on Twitter a running
media commentary, praising his ﬂatterers
and bashing his critics. Since becoming
president, Mr Trump has tweeted approv-
ingly about Fox News or its hosts 87
times—devoting as much Twitter time to
the network as he has to Republican
lawmakers’ eﬀorts to overhaul America’s
health-care system.
Many of Mr Trump’s most enduring
catchphrases are swipes at media compa-
nies. There have been 79 gripes about
“fake news” since Mr Trump took oﬃce.
He has used the insult “failing New York
Times” verbatim 21 times. (“Amazon
Washington Post”, his latest sloganeering
attempt, seems to be ﬁzzling.) 
Republicans now loathe mainstream
media outlets so much that many say
they would stoop to unconstitutional
means to silence them. When YouGov
asked whether courts should be allowed
to “shut down news media outlets for
publishing or broadcasting stories that
are biased and inaccurate”, 45% of Repub-
licans were in favour, compared with
20% who opposed the measure. More
than half thought it acceptable to ﬁne an
oﬀending news outlet (and 40% thought
it would not violate the First Amend-
ment to do so).

Trump News Network

United States, % polled*
who trust Donald Trump
more than:

0

20

40

Democrat
Independent
Republican
60
80

CNN

New York Times

Washington Post

Weekly Standard

National Review

Fox News

Sources: YouGov; The Economist

*July 23rd-25th 2017

The Economist August 5th 2017 

Gangs and immigration

A horrible MS

L O S A N G E L E S

The federal government may inadvertently be helping MS-13 with its recruiting
ON THE evening of April 11th, two
women associated with MS-13, a crim-
inal gang with a large presence in the Un-
ited States and Central America, lured ﬁve
teenage boys to a wooded park in Suﬀolk
County, New York, where a dozen MS-13
gangsters with nicknames such as “Anti-
christ” were waiting. On their arrival, the
gang members surrounded the boys, who
they thought belonged to a rival gang, and
attacked them with knives, machetes and
wooden clubs. One of the boys managed
to ﬂee; the corpses of the other four were so
badly mutilated that the police refused to
show their families the murder scene. 
President Donald Trump often uses
MS-13 to prove the need for stricter immi-
gration policies. Many of the gang’s mem-
bers in America are immigrants; some are
undocumented. Their motto is “Kill, rape,
and control”. In a speech to police oﬃcers
on July 28th in Suﬀolk County, a largely
suburban area where MS-13 has murdered
17 people since January 2016, Mr Trump
thundered: “They kidnap, they extort, they
rape and they rob. They prey on children.
They shouldn’t be here. They stomp on their
victims. They beat them with clubs. They
slash them with machetes, and they stab
them with knives. They have transformed
peaceful parks and beautiful, quiet neigh-
bourhoods
into bloodstained killing
ﬁelds. They’re animals.”
MS-13 is not a new threat. The gang, also
known as Mara Salvatrucha, originated in
Los Angeles in the 1980s when a brutal civil
war in El Salvador led hundreds of thou-
sands of Salvadorans to stream north and
seek refuge in the United States. It was
formed originally as a way for new Salva-
doran immigrants in Los Angeles to defend
themselves against the Mexican gangs that
dominated the city’s barrios. Deportations
of MS-13 gang members beginning in the
1990s extended the gang’s inﬂuence to El
Salvador, Honduras and Guatemala,
which now, partly as a result, have some of
the highest murder rates in the world. 
Over the past several decades MS-13 has
also spread across America, where the De-
partment of Justice estimates it now has
more than 10,000 members and operates
in at least 40 states and the District of Co-
lumbia. That makes it a large national gang,
but by no means the largest. In compari-
son, a report by the National Gang Intelli-
gence Centre from 2009 estimated the
population of the Latin Kings, another Lat-
ino gang, to be between 20,000 and

35,000. Membership of the Crips, a largely
African-American gang, was estimated to
be between 30,000 and 35,000. 
What makes MS-13 unique is its brazen-
ness. According to two FBI agents, Asiano
Davila and Daniel Netemeyer, whereas
many gangs conduct drive-by shootings to
eliminate rivals, MS-13 members tend to
use knives and machetes. They are swift to
kill. Stephen Gunson, a deputy district at-
torney in Los Angeles’s Hardcore Gang Di-
vision, recalls one case in which a Los An-
geles man entered one of MS-13’s casitas,
secretive dens where the gang hawks alco-
hol, drugs and prostitutes. He told the
MS-13 members he was the cousin of a
member of the rival Playboys gang; they
promptly shut down the casita, took him
round the back and shot him. In 2016 in Suf-
folk County, MS-13 members killed two
teenage girls with machetes and baseball
bats after one of the girls clashed with
them at high school.

Guilty until proven innocent

Minor report
The FBI contends that, after a long period
of relative quiet, MS-13 has grown more
violent over the past two years, particular-
ly in Suﬀolk County and around Washing-
ton, DC. Like Mr Trump, Messrs Davila and
Netemeyer partly attribute this to an inﬂux
of unaccompanied child migrants into the
United States. Over the past ﬁve years,
more than 185,000 such children have ﬂed

United States 27

across the border largely to escape gang vi-
olence (including from MS-13) in Central
America. According to Senate testimony in
May by Timothy Sini, the Suﬀolk County
police commissioner, 4,624 unaccompa-
nied child migrants were settled in Suﬀolk
County from the beginning of 2014 to
March 2017, making it one of the largest re-
cipients of such young people in the coun-
try. This gave MS-13 an ample pool of rud-
derless teenagers, struggling with a new
culture and language, from which to re-
cruit. In testimony to the Senate Commit-
tee on the Judiciary on June 21st, Carla Pro-
vost, the acting chief of the United States
Border Patrol, said that of the 250,000 un-
accompanied minors apprehended at the
border since 2012, 56 were suspected of
having ties to MS-13.
Large populations of new immigrants
also give MS-13 more potential victims to
prey on. Whereas other gangs generate
proﬁts largely through drug sales, MS-13
makes most of its money through extor-
tion. Jorja Leap, an anthropologist at the
University of California, Los Angeles Lus-
kin School of Public Aﬀairs who studies
gangs, says MS-13 targets undocumented
immigrants because it knows they may
hesitate to report crimes for fear of depor-
tation. An MS-13 gangster may approach a
street vendor or a prostitute and threaten
to kill them unless they pay weekly “rent”
money. MS-13’s presence in the “Northern
Triangle” of Central America allows it to
gather
information about
immigrants’
families which it can use as leverage, too.
“They might threaten to kill an aunt, an un-
cle, a grandma back in El Salvador or Hon-
duras,” Ms Leap says. 
While law enforcement oﬃcials agree
that MS-13 is a problem that needs to be
tackled, many are wary of Mr Trump’s pre-
scription for doing so. In his speech on July
28th the president railed against sanctuary
cities, where police ignore the immigration
status of the victims and suspects they in-
teract with. To Mr Trump, such policies al-
low immigrants with criminal records to
slip back into society and commit more of-
fences. But some police chiefs say such
policies allow them to ﬁght MS-13 more ef-
fectively. After the Los Angeles Police De-
partment (LAPD) busted 21 suspected MS-13
members in May, Police Chief Charlie Beck
said: “MS preys on the illegal immigrant
community. They extort them. They rob
them. They rape them. They murder them.
Without their co-operation as witnesses,
none of this would be possible.” 
“All kids join gangs because they want
to be part of the most fearsome gang, the
biggest gang, the best gang,” says Alex San-
chez, a former MS-13 member who now
runs a gang-violence-prevention group in
Los Angeles. It would be grimly ironic if, by
singling out the gang in speeches, the
Trump administration makes it more at-
tractive to potential recruits. 7

28 United States

The Economist August 5th 2017

Lexington

A Republican senator revolts

Jeﬀ Flake of Arizona says Donald Trump is destroying the conservative movement

in secret in case aides tried to dissuade him, stares only half the
truth in the face. Mr Flake describes a conservative universe di-
vided in two. One half is a realm of uplifting ideas. The other is a
realm of political calculation and voter rage. Rather powerfully,
his book accords each realm its own landscape: rugged, sun-
baked Arizona for ideas, and swampy Washington for politics. A
ﬁfth-generation Arizonan, the senator grew up on the cattle ranch
founded by his Mormon ancestors. One of 11 children, he de-
scribes a state “where conditions were Spartan and life was what
you made of it.” He is not joking: aged ﬁve, he was swimming in
the community pool when his ﬁnger—poorly reattached after an
accident with farm machinery—ﬂoated away. His mother
shushed his cry of “Mom! My ﬁnger fell oﬀ,” rather than alarm
the neighbours. The ranch exposed him to Mexican labourers,
who did not always have the right papers but who “usually
worked harder than we did”. He brings the thought up-to-date,
writing movingly about two Muslim immigrant doctors in Arizo-
na who work tirelessly to save his father-in-law’s life.
Quoting such heroes as Goldwater or Ronald Reagan, Mr
Flake makes a limited government sound a bit like parents re-
moving training wheels from a child’s bicycle: a compassionate
nudge towards freedom. He contrasts this with the nationalist,
zero-sum visions of Trumpism, lamenting that: “Seemingly over-
night, we became deﬁned not by the limitless aspirations of a free
people but by our grievances and resentments.”
The senator is brave enough to admit that Republicans were
losing their way before Mr Trump. Any honest accounting will,
he suggests, call Newt Gingrich, the former Speaker of the House
of Representatives, the modern progenitor of a conservative poli-
tics of personal destruction. Mr Flake notes how such
congressional bosses as Tom DeLay shunned chances to pass bi-
partisan legislation, if a party-line vote would ﬁre up the base.
There are not-very-veiled swipes at the present Republican ma-
jority leader in the Senate, Mitch McConnell, for setting out to
make Barack Obama a one-term president, rather than ponder-
ing how to advance conservative ideas. Mr Flake expresses hor-
ror at the moment when 47 Republican senators, led by Tom Cot-
ton of Arkansas, wrote to Iran’s mullahs to tell them that
President Obama’s nuclear negotiations were invalid.

Pitting “makers” against “takers”
Yet Mr Flake’s contrast between conservative ideas and partisan
rage is too neat and tidy. When Goldwater, his hero, lost the elec-
tion of 1964 in a landslide, Republicans concluded that his pro-
blem was too honest a platform. Americans believed that Gold-
water might actually cut back federal safety nets for the old, the
sick and the poor. From then on, the party has carefully but-
tressed calls to love freedom with appeals to resent redistribu-
tion, especially to the undeserving. Reagan’s speech about a high-
living “welfare queen” mattered as much as sunny talk of individ-
ual liberty. Mitt Romney, a far better man than Mr Trump, told
Republicans that 47% of the public were a lost cause, believing
themselves “victims” entitled to government handouts. Mr Flake
is correct to condemn Senator Cotton’s Iran letter. But he should
also remember how Mr Cotton once told voters in Arkansas that
they had all seen food stamps recipients with steak in their shop-
ping baskets, “talking on a brand-new iPhone”, and heading to a
brand-new four-wheel drive car. That was demagoguery, too, in
defence of ﬁscally conservative ideas. Mr Trump is wrecking the
Republican Party. But he did not invent conservative rage. 7

SENATOR JEFF FLAKE of Arizona has written a brave book. It
states aloud a truth that other Republicans voice only behind
closed doors: that the American conservative movement is in cri-
sis. He regrets that a demagogue, President Donald Trump, has
lured Republicans into a “Faustian bargain”, oﬀering power if
they forget everything they believe about free trade and individ-
ual freedom, about leading global alliances against tyranny, and
even about personal honour. Republicans succumbed as rapidly
as a “tranquilised elephant”, he writes in “Conscience of a Con-
servative: A Rejection of Destructive Politics and a Return to Prin-
ciple”. Now they languish in an “unconservative stew of celebri-
ty and authoritarianism,” spiced with conspiracy theories.
Bang on cue, Mr Flake’s book has been denounced by Mr
Trump’s enablers in the world of conservative celebrity. Striking-
ly, such critics as Laura Ingraham, an anti-immigrant tribune re-
portedly sounded out for the post of White House press secretary,
or Mark Levin, a splenetic star of conservative radio, do not ac-
cuse the Arizonan of exaggeration, or of muddling his priorities.
Instead they call him a de facto Democrat and a “liberal” who
must be purged. No matter that Mr Flake is a lifelong disciple of
Barry Goldwater, the ﬂinty Arizonan prophet of economic free-
dom, whose own call to arms against an overweening central
government was entitled “The Conscience of a Conservative”.
They do not care that Mr Flake spent years in Congress opposing
abortion, supporting gun rights and voting for lower taxes, enrag-
ing party leaders by campaigning against “earmarks” that direct-
ed pork-barrel dollars to favoured districts. To the ﬁst-shaking Red
Guards of Trumpism, Mr Flake’s crime is to argue—perhaps even
to remember—that their movement once held to an enduring set
of ideas. In this version of a personality cult, conservatism is
whatever their Great Helmsman’s most recent tweet says it is.
Mr Flake’s book may cost him his job. The senator is up for re-
election in 2018 and will face challengers from the hardline right
and from the left (Arizona is increasingly Hispanic). Mr Trump al-
legedly threatened to spend $10m of his own money to help oust
Mr Flake (an empty boast, on past form), after the pair clashed
over immigration, calls for a Muslim ban and other issues.
Given how much the senator has on the line, it seems churlish
to argue that he is not brave enough. Alas, his new book, written

The Amer icas

The Economist August 5th 2017 29

Also in this section
30 Temer avoids tr ial, for now
30 English-language papers struggle
32 Bello: Venezuela’s fantasy voting

Venezuela

A deadly blow to democracy

C A R A C A S

The vote for a constituent assembly entrenches dictatorship. But the standoﬀ on the
streets will continue
IT IS to be the dawn of “a new Venezuela”,
proclaimed the president, Nicolás Madu-
ro. He was celebrating the election on July
30th of a constituent assembly, which will
now become the supreme power in the
country. A day later Venezuelans got a taste
of what the new Venezuela might look like.
Before ﬁrst light, agents of Sebin, the state
security agency, swooped into the houses
of two opposition politicians and hauled
them oﬀ to prison. Leopoldo López, the
country’s most prominent political prison-
er, had been transferred to house arrest in
July. He expected re-incarceration: he had
recorded a video urging supporters to
“ﬁght for” Venezuela, to be released when
it happened. Antonio Ledezma, the former
mayor of Caracas, was still in his pyjamas
when agents forced him into a car. Some-
one took a mobile-phone video of the ar-
rest, in which a woman can be heard
screaming “dictatorship” at the abductors. 
To Venezuela’s opposition, a large share
of its citizens and many foreign govern-
ments, that is what Mr Maduro’s constitu-
ent assembly represents. No one believes
the electoral commission’s claim that 8m
Venezuelans voted to choose the body’s
545 members (see Bello). These are either
regime bigwigs or people subservient to
them. The assembly will be able to rewrite
the constitution, delay elections and issue
directives to all branches of government.
The plan is for it to meet in the neoclassical
ediﬁce that houses the legislature, which is

controlled by the opposition. 
The United States responded to the vote
by imposing sanctions on Mr Maduro. He
joins North Korea’s Kim Jong Un, Syria’s
Bashar al-Assad and Zimbabwe’s Robert
Mugabe on the list of leaders who are
banned from visiting the United States and
whose American assets are frozen. Vene-
zuela’s biggest neighbours, including Ar-
gentina, Brazil, Colombia and Mexico, say
they will not recognise the new assembly.
The ambassadors of Britain, France, Mexi-
co and Spain attended a meeting of the leg-
islature, showing which deliberative body
they regard as the legitimate one.
Apart from making Venezuela a pariah,
the assembly vote is likely to change little
in the short run. The country was already
becoming a dictatorship. The puppet su-
preme court overruled acts passed by the
legislature, or the government just ignored
them. Now the regime is likely to increase
its repression, as the re-arrests of Mr López
and Mr Ledezma suggest. On the pretext of
reforming the judiciary, the assembly is
likely to sack the attorney-general, Luisa
Ortega Díaz, a supporter-turned-critic of
the regime. She denounced the assembly
vote as “a mockery of the people”.
This will worsen the stand-oﬀ between
the regime and its foes, which include a
sprawling coalition of parties called the
Democratic Unity alliance (MUD) and irate
citizens. More than 120 people have died in
protests since April; at least ten were killed

on the day of the vote. The MUD has said
that the demonstrations will continue. 
The stalemate could be broken in two
ways. The ﬁrst would start with a ratchet-
ing up of sanctions by the United States. So
far, the Trump administration has targeted
only individuals; Mr Maduro is among the
35 Venezuelans on the blacklist of the Un-
ited States, which has said that it will add
more names. It has also threatened to
strike at Venezuela’s oil exports, either by
ending purchases or by blocking transac-
tions by PDVSA, the state-owned oil com-
pany. That would matter much more. 

Oil as a weapon
Oil is virtually the only source of hard cur-
rency; the United States buys 40% of Vene-
zuela’s exports. Although Venezuela might
ﬁnd other buyers, an American embargo
would cut oﬀ revenues in the short run
and probably force it to accept lower prices
from more distant customers. That would
worsen shortages of food and medicine,
brought about by the leftist regime’s eco-
nomic mismanagement, which have al-
ready made life close to unbearable for
most Venezuelans. The problem is, such
tough sanctions might hurt ordinary folk
more than the fat cats in charge, who con-
trol access to dollars. They might also en-
courage the regime to dig in.
That will surely be the response to hints
by Rex Tillerson, the American Secretary
of State, that the Trump administration is
aiming at regime change. On August 1st he
said the United States wants to “create a
change of conditions where either Maduro
decides he doesn’t have a future and wants
to leave of his own accord or we can return
the government processes back to their
constitution”. He did not say how this
might happen.
The second potential game changer
would be a further escalation of violence. 

1

30 The Amer icas

2 Partisans of both sides—the armed irregu-
lars who support the regime, called colecti-
vos, and the street ﬁghters of the “Resisten-
cia”—are becoming more radical and less
governable. Protesters ﬁrebombed police
motorcycles
during
demonstrations
against the assembly vote. A breakdown of
order could provoke the army to intervene,
either to defend the regime or, less likely, to
restore democracy. 
Mr Maduro would claim that his con-
stituent assembly, due to convene on Au-
gust 3rd, will end the confrontation in a
third way, by ushering in what oﬃcials call
a “new Venezuelan economy”, less depen-
dent on oil. If Venezuelans are better fed,
the ﬁght will go out of the opposition, Mr
Maduro may hope. That scenario is as be-
lievable as the oﬃcial turnout ﬁgures for
the farcical “election”. 7

Brazil

Round One to the
president

S Ã O P A U L O

Michel Temer survives one corruption
charge. More may follow
BRAZILIANS care little for Michel Temer,
their scandal-plagued president. More
than a month after the chief prosecutor,
Rodrigo Janot, indicted him for accepting
bribes, his approval rating stands at 5%. But
Mr Temer retains support where it counts
most: in congress. On August 2nd lawmak-
ers in the lower house voted not to refer the
case against him to the supreme court,
which has the power to try him. A vote the
other way would probably have led to Mr
Temer’s suspension from oﬃce. After an
uproarious debate, to which anti-Temer
deputies brought suitcases stuﬀed with
fake cash, the president won a comfortable
victory: 263 deputies voted against refer-
ring the case to the supreme court while

227 voted in favour. Mr Temer needed just
172 votes to block the motion.
But his troubles are not over. Mr Janot is
expected to bring at least two more indict-
ments against him, which may be put to a
similar vote in the lower house. The more
time Mr Temer spends defending himself,
the less he will spend promoting his pro-
gramme of economic reform, which is vital
to stabilising the country’s public ﬁnances
and to sustaining Brazil’s incipient recov-
ery from its worst-ever recession. 
The charge that Mr Temer fought oﬀ
stemmed from evidence provided by Joes-
ley Batista, a former chairman of JBS, a
meatpacking ﬁrm, who secretly recorded a
conversation with the president in March.
This prompted a sting operation by police
in which Rodrigo Loures, Mr Temer’s for-
mer aide, was ﬁlmed receiving 500,000
reais ($159,000) from Mr Batista’s envoy. Mr
Janot suspects that the cash, plus 38m reais
promised by Mr Batista, was destined for
Mr Temer. In return, Mr Janot alleges, the
president interceded with Brazil’s antitrust
agency on Mr Batista’s behalf. Mr Temer
denies all this. 
The president is nothing if not a shrewd
political operator. Armed with a spread-
sheet listing legislators according to wheth-
er they were leaning for or against him, he
spent weeks securing support in the lower
house. The savvy septuagenarian met
with more than 160 of the 513 deputies and
freed up 4.2bn reais to spend in legislators’
home areas, according to Contas Abertas, a
watchdog. Some legislators backed him
enthusiastically. Wladimir Costa, a deputy
from the Amazonian state of Pará, tattooed
the president’s name on his shoulder. Mr
Temer avoided trial by a bigger margin
than many analysts had expected. “Those
who tried to divide us got it wrong,” he
crowed after the vote.
He will now attempt to shift attention
back to his economic agenda. Despite the
charges against him, Mr Temer signed into
law a controversial labour reform on July
13th. That has raised hopes that he can re-

How many thumbs will Temer need?

The Economist August 5th 2017

form the budget-busting pension system.
The real has held its value in the face of Mr
Temer’s legal troubles, a sign of conﬁdence. 
But conﬁdence will be hard to maintain
as the charges mount up and national elec-
tions approach in October 2018. Public
opinion may begin to weigh more heavily
with politicians facing re-election (Mr
Temer is unlikely to run). One survey, taken
before the lower house voted on the char-
ges, found that 81% of Brazilians want Mr
Temer to face trial. That will make it harder
to enact the unpopular pension reform. Mr
Temer will try to pass a slimmed-down
version, predicts Christopher Garman of
Eurasia Group, a risk-analysis ﬁrm. Much
may depend on how meagre it is. 
Mr Temer may well survive the con-
gressional votes likely to be coming his
way. Though angry, Brazilian voters are
also weary. The president’s predecessor,
Dilma Rousseﬀ, was impeached last year
in part because of big protests against her.
Few Brazilians demonstrate against Mr
Temer. Apathy is an ally. “Muddling
through until next year’s election remains
the likely scenario,” argued Paulo Sotero of
the Brazil Institute at the Woodrow Wilson
Centre in Washington. The chief prosecu-
tor will try to prove him wrong. 7

Latin Amer ican media

Entering the
morgue

English-language newspapers in Latin
America are struggling
THE Buenos Aires Herald had a reputa-
tion for fearlessness. During Argenti-
na’s “dirty war” in the 1970s it was the only
newspaper that denounced the disappear-
ances of thousands of Argentines under
the military regime. The editor, Robert Cox,
and news editor, Andrew Graham-Yooll,
went into exile. Mr Graham-Yooll wrote “A
State of Fear”, a harrowing account of the
descent into dictatorship. But the Herald,
the capital’s English-language newspaper,
could not survive technological progress.
On July 31st the 141-year-old paper said it
would close.
William Cathcart, a Scot, founded the
Buenos Ayres Herald for Britons drawn to
Argentina to work on the country’s ex-
panding railways. Its ﬁrst edition was a sin-
gle sheet, with advertising on the front and
shipping news on the back. As its coverage
expanded, it sometimes scooped richer
Spanish-language rivals. 
It had counterparts across Latin Ameri-
ca. Argentina’s ﬁrst English-language pa-
per was the Buenos Ayres Standard, started
by two Irish brothers in 1861; it stopped
publishing 98 years later. The Daily Jour-

1

Y O U R B E S T D E C I S I O N T O D A T E

G l o b a l H e a d q u a r t e r s : 4 9 C h a r l e s S t r e e t  M a y f a i r  L o n d o n  W 1 J 5 E N  + 4 4 ( 0 ) 2 0 7 2 9 0 9 5 8 5

  W O R L D W I D E 

w w w. g r a y a n d f a r r a r . c o m

32 The Amer icas

The Economist August 5th 2017

2

nal, founded by an American, served read-
ers in Caracas from 1945 until 2008. The Pe-
ruvian Times, launched in 1908, survives in
digital form. The News in Mexico City, es-
tablished in 1950, still has a paper edition.
The English papers were sometimes
outspoken when the Spanish-language
press was censored, perhaps partly be-
cause their writers could easily take refuge
in their home countries. Many British and
American journalists who went on to cov-
er the region as foreign correspondents got
their start at the local English papers. 
As the number of Anglophone immi-
grants fell, tourists and expats became the

papers’ main readers. English-medium
news became less necessary for visitors
when the internet let them browse their
hometown papers from abroad. 
The Herald changed owners several
times in the 2000s before ending up in
2014 as part of Grupo Indalo, whose own-
ers are close to Cristina Fernández de
Kirchner, Argentina’s populist president
until 2015. Government advertising (and
dedicated journalists) kept the paper alive;
its editorial line became more left-wing,
but not slavishly supportive of Ms Fernán-
dez. But the government of her centre-right
successor, Mauricio Macri, hit Grupo In-

dalo with a tax demand for 10bn pesos
($570m). With estimated monthly losses of
2m pesos, the Herald brieﬂy became a
weekly before saying it would close.
The Herald and its kind are being re-
placed by publications run by nimbler en-
trepreneurs, providing information on lo-
cal events mainly to tourists and expats. In
Bogotá, Colombia’s capital, two English-
language newspapers have been founded
in the past decade. The Bubble, a website
based in Buenos Aires, has plans to expand
to Brazil and Mexico. Today’s Cathcarts are
bullish. But few expect their publications
to last 141 years. 7

Bello

Venezuela’s fantasy voting

Nicolás Maduro emulates Latin America’s bygone dictators
“IT WAS a result that was so big, so sur-
prising,” said Tibisay Lucena, the
head of Venezuela’s electoral authority,
late on July 30th. She was announcing
that 8m people had voted in an election
for a new, all-powerful constituent assem-
bly dreamed up by President Nicolás Ma-
duro. In fact, it was not surprising and
probably not big. A fortnight earlier the
opposition had got more than 7m to vote
to reject the new assembly in an unoﬃ-
cial plebiscite. So it was predictable that
Mr Maduro’s regime would claim a high-
er turnout. No matter that the electoral au-
thority’s own count—leaked to Reuters—
showed that only 3.7m had voted before
the polls were due to close. Many said
that they did so only because they feared
losing government jobs or food rations.
The ﬁrm that runs the electronic voting
system said it had been “tampered with”.
Vote inﬂation on this shameless scale
is “without precedent” in Latin America,
according to Carlos Malamud, a historian
at the Elcano Institute, a think-tank in Ma-
drid. To the outsider, the region may seem
synonymous with electoral fraud. That
has not been the case since the return of
democracy in the 1980s. Recent elections
have generally been free and fair, organ-
ised by independent electoral authorities
and watched over by qualiﬁed observers. 
Where there have been claims of
fraud, they have been mainly small-scale,
though that may have been enough to
sway close contests. Ecuador’s opposition
cried foul in a presidential election in
April this year in which Lenín Moreno,
the government candidate, won by barely
two percentage points. In Argentina
Mauricio Macri’s victory in 2015 may
have been wider than the oﬃcial margin
of three points. But in neither case can
that be proved. The opposition de-
nounced as fraudulent Mr Maduro’s vic-

tory in Venezuela in 2013, with 7.6m votes
and a margin of 1.5 percentage points. He
rejected calls for an inquiry.
Since then Mr Maduro has lost his ma-
jority. The opposition won 7.7m votes in a
parliamentary election in 2015, to the rul-
ing party’s 5.6m. Venezuela’s economy
continues to deteriorate. A section of the
ruling chavista movement opposes the
constituent assembly. To conceal popular
rejection, he appears to have revived and
expanded a defunct
tradition in Latin
America: the artiﬁcial election.
The region stands out in the developing
world (and from much of Europe) for its
long history of constitutionalism—the
Spanish-American countries secured inde-
pendence by rebelling against Bourbon ab-
solutism. Elections were the norm since
the late 19th century (though usually with
restricted suﬀrage). Electoral fraud was the
traditional means of political control. It fea-
tured stuﬀed ballot boxes, voting by the
dead and vote-buying, notes Mr Malamud.
Such methods were not enough for out-
right dictators. Several, such as Porﬁrio
Díaz in Mexico and Jorge Ubico in Guate-
mala, resorted to election by acclamatory

vote, without opposition. In the Domini-
can Republic Rafael Leónidas Trujillo, a
brutal megalomaniac, arranged things to
secure between 90% and 100% of the vote.
Perhaps he oﬀers the closest electoral par-
allel to Mr Maduro: after only 55% of vot-
ers participated in his ﬁrst election in 1930,
on later occasions he inﬂated the turnout.
Although Venezuela’s regime claims
to be socialist, its practices are similar to
those of the old-school dictators. Their
rule featured patrimonialism (capture of
public resources by the ruler’s clan) and
nepotism. So does Mr Maduro’s: his re-
gime is stuﬀed with relatives of its leaders.
Mr Maduro’s Venezuela has a partner
in reviving bad old habits. In an election
last year in Nicaragua, Daniel Ortega se-
cured a third term partly by barring the
main opposition. That was an expedient
used against populist parties by military-
backed governments in Peru in the 1940s
and 1950s and in Argentina between 1955
and 1973. It may be what Mr Maduro has
in mind for Venezuela’s opposition.
He would be wise to study his coun-
try’s political history. General Marcos Pé-
rez Jiménez was proclaimed as president
in 1952 by a constituent assembly. Five
years later, to secure an (unconstitutional)
second term, he organised a plebiscite.
The tame electoral authority declared
that his plan had the backing of 2.4m vot-
ers, with only 364,000 against. As now,
the opposition did not recognise the exer-
cise and staged protests. A month after the
vote, Pérez Jiménez was ousted in a civil-
ian-military uprising. 
Mr Maduro’s regime may be more re-
silient. But few in Venezuela or in the out-
side world are fooled by his fantasy vot-
ing. A constituent assembly designed to
legitimise his suppression of the opposi-
tion has further discredited a regime that
is now an open dictatorship of the few. 

Middle East and Afr ica

Kenya

The rematch

N A I R O B I

Another tumultuous election, with a renewed fear of violence
WHAT does it say about the fairness of
pact with William Ruto, a populist politi-
a vote when a senior election oﬃcial
cian from the Rift Valley. After the 2007
is murdered a week before polling day? On
election the pair were investigated and in-
August 8th Kenyans will pick a president,
dicted by the International Criminal Court
governors, MPs and senators. Yet instead
(ICC). Mr Kenyatta, who belongs to Kenya’s
of being excited about the chance to elect a
biggest tribe, the Kikuyu, was accused of
new government, many are terriﬁed. On
organising the mass killing of people from
July 31st Chris Msando, the chief techni-
other tribes; Mr Ruto, who is from the Ka-
cian in charge of the electronic voting sys-
lenjin, the third-biggest group, was accused
tem, was found dead in Nairobi, the capi-
of organising the murder of Kikuyus. Yet in
tal, his arm broken and his body displaying
2013 they fought a joint campaign in which
signs of torture. 
they claimed that the charges were part of
Who killed Mr Msando is far from clear.
a Western-led plot to take over Kenya. They
The opposition blames the government,
won easily. The ICC charges were later
and several analysts suspect they are right.
dropped, after key witnesses vanished.
The killing removes one of the few people
This time, Mr Kenyatta and Mr Ruto
trusted to ensure that the voting system
ought to be ahead again by a wide margin.
works. It also sends a message to other
As incumbents they have the power of pa-
electoral oﬃcials that they, too, are at risk. 
tronage. Most Kenyans vote on tribal lines;
Kenya’s democracy is one of the most
vibrant and competitive in Africa. But that
comes at a price. Elections are bitterly
fought and often violent. The results are
nearly always disputed. This murder sug-
gests that this year will be no diﬀerent. At
worst, it raises fears that violence of the
sort that led to the deaths of perhaps 1,400
people and paralysed the country after the
2007 election could happen again. 
The incumbent this year is Uhuru Ken-
yatta, the son of Jomo Kenyatta, Kenya’s
ﬁrst president following independence in
1963. Mr Kenyatta took over in 2013, the ﬁrst
election after the violence, by making a

Name                 
Age 
Tr ibe 
Position             
Family 
Indicted by ICC?     
Election history   
Business interests   
USP                 

Kenya’s presidential candidates

The choice

The Economist August 5th 2017 33

Also in this section
34 Hijacked buildings in South Afr ica
35 Niger ian verbosity
35 Israeli spy shows
36 Climate change and the Nile

For daily analysis and debate on the Middle East
and Afr ica, visit
Economist.com/world/middle-east-afr ica 

politicians win by delivering goodies to
their ethnic kin. This is not only done by
targeting government spending; many pol-
iticians use money looted from the state to
pay oﬀ local leaders who deliver votes en
masse. Well-funded ones can aﬀord heli-
copters to whizz them around the country,
and gifts for voters, as well as cars to take
them to the polls. Per head, campaign
spending in Kenya may exceed that of
America, a country 40 times richer.
Yet their pitch seems have fallen ﬂat, at
least outside their strongholds, where they
can still draw thousands. At a rally in Nai-
regie Enkare, a small town at the edge of
the Masai Mara game reserve, your corre-
spondent counted six helicopters and
twice as many brightly branded SUVs. But
the crowd, all sporting baseball caps in the
red of Jubilee, Mr Kenyatta’s party, was
thin. “This is less people than a local coun-
cil meeting,” mocked Jackson Surun,
standing at the edge of the crowd. “They
bring these people from somewhere. No
one here will vote for him.”
The opposition meanwhile has uniﬁed.
It is led by Raila Odinga, the son of another
independence-era stalwart, Oginga Od-
inga. Mr Odinga is from the Luo, a tribe 

1

Uhuru Kenyatta                       

55                                 
Kikuyu   
President                           
Son of Kenya’s f irst president       
Yes*                                       
Lost in 2002, won in 2013                     
Banking, agr iculture, media 
Claims to be a “digital president"   

Raila Odinga

72
Luo
Ex-pr ime minister, leader of opposition
Son of Kenya’s f irst vice-president
No 
Lost in 2007, lost in 2013
Ethanol, gas canisters
Promises to ser ve only one term

*Charges of stoking ethnic violence following 2007 election subsequently dropped af ter key witnesses disappeared

    
        
34 Middle East and Afr ica

2 whose members feel they have been un-
derrepresented in government since inde-
pendence. He spent much of the 1980s in
prison, accused of organising a failed coup.
He lost elections in 2007 and 2013, in each
case claiming to have been cheated. At 72
years old, this is (presumably) his last
chance to be president.
Mr Kenyatta’s ﬁrst term has not been a
complete disaster. A new Chinese-built
railway connecting the coast to Nairobi
opened in May; new roads have stretched
across the country; electriﬁcation and in-
ternet access have spread quickly. But cor-
ruption is still endemic; Kenya remains
tied up in a vicious war in next-door Soma-
lia, and growth has not created many for-
mal jobs. And this year the cost of food has
spiked, thanks to a drought. As a result,
though most polls still put Mr Kenyatta
ahead, they are a lot closer than expected. 
This heightens the tension. Mr Odinga
“is desperate to achieve victory”, says Mu-
rithi Mutiga, an analyst with International
Crisis Group, an NGO. “Not only him but
his own ethnic community, the Luos, who
feel unfairly excluded, marginalised for
ﬁve decades, their best leaders assassinat-
ed…they feel this is their last chance.” Con-
versely, if Mr Kenyatta loses, it will threaten
his family’s substantial business interests.
For Mr Ruto, who wants to stand for presi-
dent in 2022, it would be worse: “His career
will almost certainly be over.”
In the 2013 election Mr Kenyatta was ac-
cused of rigging the vote to ensure he did
not have to ﬁght a second round (under
Kenya’s constitution, if no candidate wins
more than 50% there is a run-oﬀ). But few
doubted he was genuinely ahead. And
though Mr Odinga disputed the result, he
did so at Kenya’s Supreme Court, while en-
couraging his supporters to stay at home. 
This time things could be bumpier. In
January Mr Odinga told reporters “we are
not going to take it lying down” if the elec-
tion is rigged. Some of his allies go further.
“If they steal this election, this country will
burn,” says Ledama Olekina, a candidate
in Narok County. Mr Odinga and co refuse
to say what they will do if they deem the
election to have been stolen—but they
have made it clear that this is what they ex-
pect. For over a year, they have claimed to
reveal ever more dastardly plots to rig the
vote. At their rallies, a popular chant is “no
Raila, no peace”. 
In Nairobi’s slums, where some of the
worst violence was concentrated in 2007,
people are already nervous. “I will be leav-
ing very soon,” says Catherine Kalekye, sit-
ting braiding a child’s hair at the edge of
Mathare, a neighbourhood of tin-roofed
shacks in the east of the city. Many people
are going to the countryside; others have
moved within the slum to be closer to their
kinsfolk. “We will go to Kiambu and leave
the men to ﬁght,” says Jane Wambui, a 40-
year-old Kikuyu clothes trader. She fears

Luos will seize the opportunity of protests
to take revenge on their (typically Kikuyu)
landlords. “It is not safe…they could come
and rape me, rape my daughter.”
Yet despite the fears, there are reasons
to hope the fallout will be manageable.
Some 180,000 soldiers, police and even na-
tional-park rangers have been drafted in to
maintain security. In 2007 the worst vio-
lence happened in the Rift Valley, where a
host of tribes live side by side, nursing deep
resentment over the allocation of land that
dates back to colonial days. Today, the two
most powerful groups, the Kalenjin and
the Kikuyu, are in an uneasy peace.
Unfortunately, even a peaceful election
is unlikely to bring much relief in the long
run. If Mr Kenyatta wins, his second term
will be dominated by a succession battle.
Corruption will persist. And, come 2022,
the country will witness the same vicious
battle over the spoils of government. 7

Urban redevelopment in South Afr ica

Reclaiming
hijacked buildings

J O H A N N E S B U R G

Developers are evicting gangsters and
transforming blighted neighbourhoods
BACK in 2010, Gerald Olitzki could only
survey his new building from a safe dis-
tance across the street. He bought the
downtown property for redevelopment,
even though criminals still controlled it, ex-
torting rent from poor tenants. Squatters
peered warily out of broken windows; in-
side, a warren of shacks faded into the
gloom. At that time, he did not dare ap-
proach to give your correspondent a closer
view. Fast-forward seven years, and Mr

The Economist August 5th 2017

Olitzki now strides proudly towards a
building that, like many in Johannesburg’s
inner city, has been transformed. What
was a vertical shantytown is now a bright,
clean shopping arcade bustling with small
businesses—a nail salon, a bridal shop, a
penis-enlargement
clinic—along with
ﬂoors of oﬃce space.
Downtown 
Johannesburg
remains
pockmarked with dangerous, dilapidated
“hijacked” buildings, where armed gangs
have wrested control from legitimate own-
ers. The living conditions in such places are
squalid. The problem began in the 1980s as
apartheid crumbled. White ﬂight from the
inner city left a vacuum ﬁlled by job-seek-
ing black migrants who had previously
been barred from living there. Many prop-
erty owners simply abandoned their
buildings.
But the days of “hijacked” buildings
may now be numbered. Johannesburg has
undergone impressive changes in recent
years, led by entrepreneurs and private de-
velopers who see opportunity in the ne-
glect. Newly gentriﬁed areas are home to
snazzy apartments, stylish new bars and
weekend markets that attract middle-class
visitors from the suburbs. Mr Olitzki has fo-
cused on developing aﬀordable oﬃce and
retail space, much of it for new businesses.
Ensuring safe, clean streets was essential,
so he convinced the city to give him 45-
year leases on public areas, which are now
guarded by his private security oﬃcers.
“It’s a slow process,” he says. “You start
right at the bottom and you slowly elevate
the whole market.”
Herman Mashaba, 
Johannesburg’s
ﬁercely pro-business new mayor, sees the
revitalisation of the inner city as crucial to
his strategy of creating jobs and stimulat-
ing economic growth. In July he declared
war on building-hijackers. The city has
since launched raids to push back the slum 

1

A column of Red Ants prepares for battle

Middle East and Afr ica 35

legal tenants who have nowhere else to go.
Mr Olitzki negotiated cash settlements
with the squatters and paid them to leave.
Other developers call in the Red Ants, a
feared eviction squad so named for their
red jumpsuits and helmets. After one re-
cent eviction, residents’ possessions—blan-
kets, beds, toys—were left dumped in the
street. Evicting residents requires a court’s
permission. In a landmark decision in
June, South Africa’s left-leaning Constitu-
tional Court ruled that evictions may not
be granted if they lead to homelessness.
A lack of alternative housing is a serious
stumbling block to Mr Mashaba’s plan. Jo-
hannesburg has a housing backlog of
300,000 units. Recent evictees are being
housed in tents. But the mayor also sees an
opportunity for the private sector to step in
and redevelop buildings into aﬀordable
housing. Unhelpfully, Mr Mashaba has

supplemented this with attacks on hu-
man-rights lawyers who advocate for the
poor, while scapegoating foreigners for the
problems of the inner city—worrying rhet-
oric in a country that has seen xenophobic
attacks on poor African migrants.
Stuart Wilson of the Socio-Economic
Rights Institute of South Africa, a group
that aims to “challenge inequality”, argues
that private developers have free rein to ex-
ploit the inner city. He would rather see a
mix of housing for diﬀerent income brack-
ets, as well as subsidised housing and
homeless shelters. Mr Wilson talks of is-
lands of gentriﬁcation amid a sea of pover-
ty. “In Johannesburg, there’s no overarch-
ing vision,” he says. “There is simply a
beautiﬁcation project that is entirely de-
pendent on the private sector for its imple-
mentation.” But so far only the private sec-
tor has been willing to step up. 7

The Economist August 5th 2017 

2 lords, while identifying 85 hijacked build-
ings that could be taken over by the mu-
nicipality and converted into low-cost
rental housing.
Un-hijacking a building is no easy task.
The structures are often in such poor con-
dition as to be only a shell; everything
must be rebuilt. There are mountains of
rubbish to remove (which have occasion-
ally been found to conceal dead bodies).
Water, electricity and sanitation are usual-
ly lacking. Rats are plentiful. Floors may be
covered in faeces. Such dangerous condi-
tions can easily turn buildings into death
traps. In July a ﬁre at a hijacked building in
Johannesburg called the Cape York left sev-
en people dead and hundreds homeless.
Some residents only escaped the ﬂames by
knotting together blankets and lowering
themselves from windows.
The big challenge is how to deal with il-

Niger ian verbosity

Get the gist?

L A G O S

Urban Nigerians speak a fantastic blend of languages
NO COMPLIMENT was too ﬂowery at
the launch in May of “Antidotes for
Corruption”, a book by Dino Melaye, a
Nigerian senator who has fended oﬀ
numerous allegations of graft. “What is
being launched today is, ipso facto, a new
potent Intercontinental Ballistic-cum-
Cruise missile—an unassailable Assault
weapon against, arguably, Mankind’s
Enemy Number One: Corruption,” read
the opening sentence of a leaﬂet handed
out at the event. The 43-year-old poli-
tician was described as a “unique, strong-
willed, opinionated, stubborn, deter-
mined, intelligent, proliﬁc and even sexy
young man in his prime”. 
It is not just Nigerian politics that is
prone to verbal ﬂourishes. In December
Arik Air, an airline, blamed ﬂight cancel-
lations on the “epileptic” supply of avia-
tion fuel (it was bailed out by the govern-
ment soon after). Nigerians have taken
English, the former colonial language,
and made it their own. Many switch back
and forth between standard English and
Pidgin, peppering their speech with local
words and colloquialisms. For example,
“gist” is often used both as a noun and a
verb meaning “gossip”. Someone going
out for the night is “catching fun”. Traﬃc
jams are “go-slows”. A younger girlfriend
is a “smallie”.
In a country with more than 500
languages Pidgin English is the lingua
franca. Pop culture depends on it. Fela
Kuti, one of the most popular Nigerian
singers of the 1970s and 1980s, argued
that, “You cannot sing African music in
proper English.” Many Nollywood pro-

ducers feel the same about the action
ﬁlms and convoluted romantic dramas
that they export all over the continent.
The Pidgin phrase Naija no dey carry last,
roughly meaning “Nigerians strive to
ﬁnish ﬁrst”, has become an unoﬃcial
national motto (as well as the title of a
book satirising the country). 
Many English-language radio hosts
talk in accents that indicate they have
lived in Britain or America. But Nigerians
can also tune in to the Pidgin “people’s
station” Wazobia FM and, soon, BBC
Pidgin. The celebrated novelist Chinua
Achebe’s defence of writing in English,
rather than his native Igbo, would ring
true today whether spoken by politician
or pop star. “We intend to do unheard-of
things with it.” 

Israeli entertainment

Carrie on
watching

J E R U S A L E M

Israeli TV shows are conquering the
world
THERE are only about 9m Hebrew-
speakers, yet Netﬂix, an online video
service, now oﬀers a dozen Hebrew-lan-
guage shows to its subscribers. Most He-
brew-speakers will have already seen
them on Israeli television, but Netﬂix is
betting that, subtitled, they will attract
viewers around the world. Like other tele-
vision companies, it
is excited about
drama from Israel. As well as investing in
television series, it is behind a new Israeli
ﬁlm, “The Angel”, based on the life of an
Egyptian spy run by Mossad. Most of the
Israeli shows on oﬀer deal with terrorism,
espionage or the Israeli-Palestinian con-
ﬂict. There is irony here. While Israeli poli-
ticians grumble that their country is unfair-
ly portrayed by the media, its television
producers are cashing in on Israel’s reputa-
tion for spymastery. 
The best-known Israeli series to date is
“Prisoners of War”, which lasted only two
seasons on Israeli screens, but was remade
as the American blockbuster “Homeland”,
starring Claire Danes. In this guise it has al-
ready broadcast its sixth season, with se-
ries seven in production. “Homeland” gen-
erated much controversy, thanks to its
remarkably bloodthirsty portrayal of Mus-
lims. But it also focused interest on Israel’s
television industry, which has become a
growing exporter both of series and for-
mats for production abroad. According to
the Israeli Export Institute, the country’s
global TV and cinema sales have quadru-
pled over the past decade, to $268m in 2016. 
Dramas full of ruthless terrorists and 

1

36 Middle East and Afr ica

2

What’s “Allahu akbar” in Chinese?

brilliant-but-ﬂawed secret agents still pre-
dominate, but local producers boast that
they are now exporting other kinds of
show, too. Avi Armoza, the boss of a ﬁrm
that has sold over 60 Israeli television for-
mats abroad, says his biggest hit is “Still
Standing”, a general-knowledge quiz show
in which unsuccessful contestants are
dropped through a trapdoor in the studio
ﬂoor. It has sold 5,000 episodes in 15 coun-
tries. “The Israeli market is so small,” he ex-
plains. “Producers here work much harder
at adapting to the world.” 
One of the industry’s proudest exports
is “Yellow Peppers”, the story of a family of
farmers in the Arabah Valley who struggle
to come to terms with their young son’s au-
tism. The BBC remade it as “The A Word”,
set in Britain’s equally scenic Lake District.
The ﬁrst Israeli series that both made
lots of money and wowed critics outside
Israel was “In Treatment”, which revolves
around a psychologist and his patients. It
was recreated from an Israeli original by
HBO in 2008. It did not have any bearded
terrorists in it, but it did have something
else that has become a hallmark of Israeli
television—a 
complex
psychological
drama played out by a few actors on a
small set. This was born of necessity: mod-
est budgets mean that Israeli shows sel-
dom involve big casts or ﬂashy locations. 
Just as dark Scandinavian crime dra-
mas have enthralled global audiences, Is-
rael has come to specialise in “complex se-
ries created in frugal conditions, making
the most of them,” says Einav Schiﬀ, an Is-
raeli TV critic. He likens this to the way that
so much Israeli technology (from missiles
to cyber-security software) sprang from
the need to defend a small, beleaguered
country cheaply. But whereas Israeli de-
fence ﬁrms tend to make their customers
feel a little safer, Israeli television shows of-
ten leave them scared out of their wits. 7

Climate change and the Nile

Flood and famine

C A I R O

The countries in the Nile basin will
suﬀer if they do not learn to co-operate
TO THE untrained eye, the satellite pho-
tos of north-west Ethiopia on July 10th
may have seemed benign. They showed a
relatively small pool of water next to an
enormous building site on the Blue Nile,
the main tributary of the Nile river. But the
project under construction is the Grand
Ethiopian Renaissance Dam, which is
more than halfway complete. And the wa-
ter is why it is so controversial.
Since Ethiopia announced its plan to
build the dam, it has inspired threats of
sabotage from Egypt, which sits down-
stream and relies on the Nile for electricity,
farming and drinking water. Egypt claims
that it is entitled to a certain proportion of
the Nile’s water based on colonial-era trea-
ties. Ethiopia dismisses those agreements.
The pool of water in the photos suggested
that it was beginning to ﬁll the reservoir be-
hind the dam, reducing the river’s ﬂow.
That turns out not to have been the
case. The pool was deemed by Egypt to be
a result of construction and seasonal Nile
ﬂooding. But the alarms it raised are indica-
tive of how sensitive negotiations be-
tween Egypt, Ethiopia and Sudan have be-
come. Talks over such things as how fast to
ﬁll the reservoir and how to operate the
dam have stumbled. And a potentially
huge complication looms over any discus-
sion of the Nile’s future: climate change.
By 2050 around a billion people will
live in the countries through which the
Nile and its tributaries ﬂow. That alone will
put enormous stress on the water supply.
But according to a study by Mohamed
Siam and Elfatih Eltahir of MIT, potential
changes to the river’s ﬂow, resulting from
climate change, may add to the strain.
Messrs Siam and Eltahir conclude that on
current trends the annual ﬂow could in-
crease, on average, by up to 15%. That may
seem like a good thing, but it could also
grow more variable, by 50%. In other
words, there would be more (and worse)
ﬂoods and droughts. 
There is, of course, uncertainty in the
projections, not least because diﬀering glo-
bal climate models give diﬀerent numbers.
But the idea that the ﬂow of the Nile is like-
ly to become more variable is lent credibil-
ity, the authors argue, by the fact that
trends over decades seem to agree with
them, and by consideration of the eﬀects
of El Niños. These colossal climatic oscilla-
tions, driven by changes in the tempera-
ture of the Paciﬁc, are correlated with the
Nile’s ﬂow, and climate-change studies

The Economist August 5th 2017

suggesting more extreme El Niños in years
to come thus bolster the idea of a more
variable Nile.
More storage capacity will be needed to
smooth out the Nile’s ﬂow. But unlike
Egypt’s large Aswan Dam, which was built
with storage in mind, the new Ethiopian
one is designed for electricity production.
Once water starts gushing through its tur-
bines, it is expected to produce over 6,000
megawatts of power. It is unclear, though,
if the structure has the necessary ﬂexibility
to meet downstream demands in periods
of prolonged drought.
The talks between the three countries
seem to be glossing over the potential ef-
fects of climate change. The ﬁlling of the
reservoir is being negotiated in terms of
years, but nature may not co-operate with
their timeline. The countries would be bet-
ter oﬀ focusing on how much water is
needed downstream, which will vary in
wet and dry years, say experts. Similar con-
siderations will need be taken into account
when running the dam. “Nowhere in the
world are two such large dams on the
same river operated without close co-ordi-
nation,” says another study from MIT. But
so far co-operation is in short supply. The
latest round of talks has been postponed.
Even the methodology of impact studies is
cause for wrangling.
Once the dam is up and running, the
Nile’s variability will be controllable for
some 60 years, say Messrs Siam and Elta-
hir. That assumes the dam is ﬂexible
enough and that the countries work to-
gether. Even then, storage would have to be
increased by about 45% to keep things
steady for the next 60 years. So the coun-
tries have time to build new dams; but that
will need even greater co-operation. 7

Cairo

LIBYA

EGYPT

N

ile

Aswan Dam

CHAD

SUDAN

Khartoum

Grand Ethiopian
Renaissance Dam

White
Nile

SOUTH
      SUDAN

CENTRAL
AFRICAN
REP.

IRAQ

SAUDI
ARABIA

Red Sea

ERITREA

Blue Nile

DJIBOUTI

Addis Ababa

ETHIOPIA

Juba

UGANDA

Kampala

KENYA

Lake Victor ia

TANZANIA

C O N G O

RWANDA
BURUNDI

Europe

Sanctions on Russia

The punishment continues

M O S C OW

Do economic restrictions change Russian behaviour?
IN LATE June Daimler, a German carmak-
power at home. Yet in the long term they
er, broke ground on a new Mercedes-
may undermine the stability of his rule.
Benz plant north-west of Moscow. “We are
The ﬁrst sanctions came in response to
conﬁdent in the long-term potential of Rus-
the takeover of Crimea in March 2014, and
sia,” Markus Schäfer, a board member, said
targeted individuals with travel bans and
at the ceremony. The €250m ($296m) fac-
asset freezes. In July that year, as Russian-
tory marked the ﬁrst investment by a West-
backed separatists rampaged in eastern
ern carmaker since America and the Euro-
Ukraine, “sectoral sanctions” followed, re-
pean Union slapped sanctions on Russia
stricting credit to a host of Russian energy
as punishment for its aggression in Uk-
and defence ﬁrms and banks. The mea-
raine three years ago. 
sures were calibrated to avoid rocking glo-
After more than two years of recession,
bal markets and to win support from the
Russia is projected to return to growth this
European Union, which passed sanctions
year. Until recently, the chill that sanctions
of its own. “The purpose was never to
put on the investment climate seemed to
bring down the Russian economy,” says a
be thawing. “People had begun to forget
former American oﬃcial. 
about them,” says Chris Weafer of Macro-
After the oil price collapsed in late 2014,
Advisory, a Moscow-based consultancy.
Russia’s economy fell into crisis. Sanctions
But in late July America’s Congress voted
to expand the sanctions. Vladimir Putin re-
sponded by demanding that America re-
duce its diplomatic staﬀ in Russia by some
750 people. (Most of those aﬀected are like-
ly to be Russian employees.) He also shut
down the American diplomatic dacha in
Moscow’s Serebryany Bor forest—even the
barbecues had to go. 
The new oﬀensive has revived argu-
ments over whether sanctions work. Pro-
ponents say they helped stall Russia’s mil-
itary intervention in Ukraine. Naysayers
reckon they just let politicians look tough.
The truth is more complicated. So far they
have not changed Mr Putin’s behaviour
abroad, and have helped him consolidate

Sources: Thomson Reuters; Economist Intelligence Unit

Crude coincidence

Russia
Russia, GDP, % change

Individual sanctions
take ef fect

Sectoral sanctions
take ef fect

Brent crude oil pr ice

Annexation of Cr imea

on year earlier

6

4

2

+

0

–

2

4

$ per barrel

2012

13

50

0

150

100

14

15

16

17

The Economist August 5th 2017 37

Also in this section
38 Will Amer ica arm Ukraine?
38 The migrants Poland likes
39 Urban planning in France
40 Charlemagne: Deutschland is dozing

For daily analysis and debate on Europe, visit
Economist.com/europe

made things worse. A credit crunch led the
government to dip into reserves to bail out
banks and ﬁrms. Uncertainty made for-
eigners cautious about dealing with any-
one in Russia, not just those on the lists.
These “silent sanctions” chilled the busi-
ness climate, says Natalia Orlova, chief
economist at Alfa-Bank, Russia’s largest
private bank. Foreign direct investment fell
from $69bn in 2013 to just $6.8bn in 2015. 
American oﬃcials seized upon this as
proof that sanctions work. “Russia is isolat-
ed, with its economy in tatters,” President
Barack Obama declared in January 2015. At
the time Western leaders fretted that Rus-
sia might push deeper into Ukraine. Sup-
porters of the sanctions argue that they
helped prevent
this, underpinning the
signing of the Minsk peace agreements in
February 2015. 
Nonetheless, the sanctions have not al-
tered Mr Putin’s strategy. Russia continues
to support the separatist republics in Uk-
raine, and Crimea’s annexation has be-
come a fait accompli. “The honest truth is
that [sanctions] have yet to change their
policies,” says Evelyn Farkas, the former
Russia point person at the Pentagon. Russia
went on to intervene in Syria and, in 2016,
meddle in America’s elections. 
At home, the government used the
sanctions to blame the economic down-
turn on conniving foreigners. By cutting Mr
Putin’s cronies oﬀ from global markets,
sanctions “inadvertently made them more
dependent on the Kremlin”, argues An-
drew Weiss of the Carnegie Endowment, a
think-tank. In 2015, according to the Rus-
sian version of Forbes, Arkady Rotenberg,
Mr Putin’s judo buddy and a sanctioned
construction magnate, received 555bn rou-
bles’ worth of government orders. Sanc-
tions became an object of public ridicule.
A patriotic T-shirt captured the mood: a
drawing of a nuclear missile captioned 

1

38 Europe

2 “The Topol is not afraid of sanctions.” 
With time, business came to fear them
less, too. In 2014 United States Treasury of-
ﬁcials warned American companies oﬀ at-
tending the St Petersburg International
Economic Forum, Russia’s equivalent of
Davos. By 2016 many CEOs had returned.
Russia successfully placed a $1.25bn sover-
eign Eurobond in September 2016, with
more than half bought by Americans. The
United Nations reckons that 280 greenﬁeld
investment projects in Russia in 2016, be-
low the ten-year peak of 596 announced in
2008, but an improvement over the nadir
of 194 in 2014. IKEA, Leroy Merlin, Pﬁzer
and Mars Inc all have plans for stores or
factories. 
The new sanctions may give foreign in-
vestors pause. That worries the Kremlin.
As Mr Putin looks towards his fourth term
(he is expected to win next year’s election),
Russians are more concerned with their
wallets than with Crimea. Growth this
year is projected to be 2% or less. For the
elite, the prospect of long-term stagnation
and endless standoﬀ with the West raises
questions about the country’s direction.
“The sense of an historic dead-end evokes
panic,” writes Vladimir Frolov, a Russian
analyst. Sanctions will not cause Mr Putin
to reverse course, but they do make it hard-
er for him to drive his way out. 7

Amer ican-Russian relations

Arming Ukraine

America may at last be willing to oﬀer
Ukraine weapons 
WHEN Russian members of parlia-
ment uncorked champagne to cele-
brate the electoral victory of Donald
Trump, they hoped that America would
stop meddling in the former Soviet back-
yard and ease sanctions imposed in re-
sponse to its war in Ukraine. But as some
Russians are now saying, it was too early to
drink it. On August 2nd Mr Trump reluc-
tantly signed a law which heaps new sanc-
tions on Russia and limits his ability to lift
them. A few days earlier, Mike Pence,
America’s vice-president, went to Estonia
and Georgia and warned against further
aggression from “your unpredictable
neighbour to the east”. And America may
soon supply Ukraine with lethal weapons,
a step that Barack Obama refused to take. 
Mr Obama’s inaction was heavily criti-
cised at the time by many Republicans, in-
cluding Kurt Volker, a former ambassador
to NATO and a close associate of John
McCain, a hawkish Republican senator.
Last month Mr Volker was appointed by
the State Department as America’s special

representative to Ukraine. It is up to Mr
Trump’s administration to approve the
supply of arms to Ukraine, but most mem-
bers of his cabinet are said to be on board.
A decision could come within weeks.
American oﬃcials and their European
counterparts are also discussing whether
to begin using the terms “aggression”,
“war” and “Russian forces” in place of
“conﬂict” and “separatists” with regard to
the ﬁghting in eastern Ukraine. One reason
Russian aggression got as far as it did, the
argument goes, was that neither the West
nor Ukraine was prepared to call it by its
proper name. America and its allies re-
strained Ukraine from ﬁghting when Rus-
sia invaded and annexed Crimea—and a
weak, post-revolutionary Ukrainian gov-
ernment acquiesced.
Following Russia’s interference in its
elections last year, America seems willing
to push back more robustly. Members of
the Trump administration calculate that
Russia has limited scope to escalate. Mr Pu-
tin will try to persuade them otherwise.
One option might be to occupy Belarus, a
former Soviet republic. Another might be
to stir political instability in Ukraine. 
Awkwardly, America is increasing its
support for Ukraine just as Ukraine’s lead-
ers are becoming more focused on their
own economic and political fortunes, rath-
er than the good of the country. Last week
Petro Poroshenko, Ukraine’s chocolate-ty-
coon-turned-president, stripped Mikheil
Saakashvili, a radical anti-corruption re-
former, of Ukrainian citizenship. Mr Saa-
kashvili, a former president of Georgia
who was forced out of his native country
by Bidzina Ivanishvili, its richest oligarch,
came to Ukraine after the Maidan revolu-
tion in 2014 to carry on with his ﬁght
against the post-Soviet malaise.
After serving as a governor of Odessa,
he fell out with Mr Poroshenko, accusing
him of corruption and collusion with oli-
garchs. In an interview with Ukrainska
Pravda, an independent Ukrainian news
site, Mr Saakashvili said Mr Poroshenko’s
main motivation was making money. Oth-
er activists have criticised Mr Poroshenko
for lacking the political will to tackle cor-
ruption. Government prosecutors have in-
advertently provided evidence for that
charge by launching attacks on anti-cor-
ruption activists.
The prosecutors’ latest target is Olek-
sandr Danyliuk the reform-minded ﬁ-
nance minister. Mr Danyliuk has tried to
make the country’s system of VAT refunds
(a major source of corruption) more trans-
parent. He has also tried to prune the bud-
get of the prosecution service. On July 31st
the prosecutor general’s oﬃce said it was
probing his income and property. 
In fact, the ﬁnance minister’s problems
stem from a ﬁght between Mr Poroshenko
and his own government. Last month,
while Mr Danyliuk was in London discuss-

The Economist August 5th 2017

ing Ukraine’s economic reforms, the coun-
try’s budget was re-carved by the Rada, the
parliament, with the help of a close asso-
ciate of Mr Poroshenko. Some of the
changes introduced in Mr Danyliuk’s ab-
sence make the budget impossible to fulﬁl,
and resemble dodgy schemes used under
the previous regime. The budget also over-
estimates the expected tax collection from
businesses, creating even more room for
extortion. 
No amount of weapons supplied by
America will defend Ukraine from the in-
ternal malaise which made it vulnerable to
Russian aggression in the ﬁrst place. 7

The migrants Poland likes

Plugging the gap

K A L I S Z

Ukrainians are powering Poland’s
economy
POLAND’S most visible labour market
begins shortly after dawn. About 30
women and a similar number of men wait
in separate groups beside a road half an
hour’s drive south of Warsaw. The eager
stand at the kerb, craning their necks to
search for cars. The more resigned slump in
the shade of a tree or pace about, smoking.
When a Volvo pulls up they dash towards
it, awaiting oﬀers of work. The youngest is
20, the oldest a gap-toothed 53-year-old. All
of them are Ukrainian.
The number of Ukrainians in Poland
has soared since ﬁghting began in eastern
Ukraine in 2014. There is no deﬁnitive ﬁg-
ure, but around 1m are estimated to be
working in Poland at any given time. Most
did not ﬂee the war but its economic conse-
quences: a recession that lasted two years,
unemployment and a plunging currency.

1

2

The Economist August 5th 2017 

They can earn ﬁve times more than at
home, picking tomatoes, mixing cement or
driving for Uber, the ride-hailing ﬁrm.
Companies can register them to work for
six months at a time, but some, like those at
the roadside, work illegally. Ivan, 28,
knocks back an energy drink as he waits to
choose his next boss. “No sleep!” he ex-
plains. “Work, work, work.”
Employers are chipper. A tumbling
birth rate and the emigration of 2m Poles to
other European Union countries has
shrunk the labour supply. Unemployment
is at its lowest since 1991 and the economy
is surging. The Union of Entrepreneurs and
Employers (ZPP) says 5m more workers are
needed to sustain growth over the next
three decades. As Katarzyna Sidlo of War-
saw’s Centre for Social and Economic Re-
search points out, Ukrainians alone will
not be enough to plug the gap, but they
help. One businessman says he hires Uk-
rainian plumbers because they cost half as
much as Poles and are “very respectable”.
In 2013 there were only 527 temporary
foreign workers in the central Polish town
of Kalisz. Now there are nearly 10,700.
Most are Ukrainian. In March a Ukrainian
priest arrived to minister to the migrants in
their own language, one of 15 being posted
across Poland. Karolina Pawliczak, the dep-
uty mayor, welcomes the newcomers.
“Poles can pick and choose” jobs, she says.
Ukrainians “are saving our labour market”. 
Voters are ambivalent about the new-
comers. In a survey in 2016, 63% told CBOS,
a pollster, that Ukrainians are good for the
economy. But a similar number said the
government should restrict the ﬂow of mi-
grants from the east. Meanwhile, govern-
ment ministers invoke the inﬂux of Ukrai-
nians as an excuse for defying EU demands
to accept refugees from the Middle East,
saying their country is already shouldering
the burden of migration from a war-torn
country. In fact, most of the Ukrainians are
economic migrants from the country’s
peaceful areas. Only a few hundred apply
for refugee status in Poland each year, and
in 2016 just 16 received it.
Firms now fret that the stream of cheap
labour could soon dry up. Rules intro-
duced in May allow Ukrainians to travel in
the EU (but not Britain and Ireland) for 90
days without a visa. They cannot work, but
Polish employers worry that will change,
and that many will ﬁnd black-market jobs
in the meantime. In the past few weeks,
plenty have visited the Polish oﬃces of
Work Service, a temporary staﬃng agency,
asking for help getting work further west.
ZPP wants the government to induce
Ukrainians to stay in Poland by granting an
amnesty to those working illegally. Alter-
natively, jokes its president, Cezary Kaz-
mierczak, it should cut oﬀ power two
nights a week to keep Poles at home in the
evening. When a curfew was imposed in
the 1980s, the birth rate soared. 7

Europe 39

Urban planning in France

We’ll always have
Val d’Europe

V A L D ’ E U R O P E

Outside Paris, a Disneyﬁed Paris
ONE of the newer attractions at Disney-
land Paris is “Ratatouille: The Adven-
ture”, a ride through Paris as seen by Rémy,
the movie’s rodent gastronome hero. Lo-
cated in a twee movie-set version of the
city, complete with a fountain, café and
overpriced bistro, it could easily pass for
the real thing, were it not for the diminu-
tive scale and cheerful waiters. (Disney-
land is a realm of fantasy after all.) 
Disney has experience building repli-
cas of Paris. At the EPCOT theme park in
Florida, the “French pavilion” recreates a
Parisian market, wine bar and a mini-Eiﬀel
Tower. But the company’s most ambitious
faux Paris is not in a theme park at all. A few
kilometres down the road from Disney-
land is the commercial heart of Val d’Eu-
rope, a cluster of imitation belle époque
housing blocks with mansard roofs sur-
rounding a giant shopping centre. All of it is
built to design guidelines lifted from Baron
Haussmann, 
the architect of Paris’s
mid-19th-century reconstruction. 
The development was part of the deal
Disney made in 1987 to build its European
theme park in Val d’Europe, a then empty
part of Marne-la-Vallée, one of France’s
“new towns” planned in the 1960s. Disney
had learned the importance of controlling
the land surrounding its parks from Ana-
heim, California, where a rash of cheap ho-
tels and low-quality restaurants spread
around the original Disneyland. In Florida,
and then in France, Disney insisted on buy-
ing up huge chunks of land. It controls
2,230 hectares of Val d’Europe, or about
two-thirds of the total area. About half of
that has been developed into two theme
parks (a third is in the works), a “nature vil-
lage” resort set to open this summer, public

services including a high school and a hos-
pital, and some 12,000 new homes. 
Val d’Europe is one of two full-ﬂedged
towns Disney built under Michael Eisner,
the company’s boss from 1984 to 2005 and
an urban-planning enthusiast. In Florida it
was Celebration, an idealised community
of picket fences and front porches that
promised a return to 1950s America. Val
d’Europe shares Celebration’s principle of
“new urbanism”, which promotes mixed
zoning, density and walkability. But the de-
sign decisions came from the French bu-
reaucracy. “The last thing they wanted to
see was a new idea,” says a former Disney
executive involved in the negotiations. 
This was, in part, a reaction against sub-
urbanisation, says Brian Shea, an architect
who worked on Val d’Europe’s master
plan. But it was also a rejection of the high
postmodernism of Ricardo Boﬁll’s hous-
ing estates in nearby Noisy-le-Grand.
Though spectacular
to 
look at—they
formed the backdrop to such alarming
movies as “Brazil” and “The Hunger
Games”—they failed as experiments in ur-
ban housing. Nobody, it turned out, actual-
ly wanted to live on the set of a retro-futur-
istic dystopia.
Val d’Europe has been a commercial
success. Under the terms of its agreement
with the state, Disney retains the option to
buy more land at 1987 prices—€1.69 ($2.00)
per square metre—which it can then sell on
at market price or develop. The region’s
population grew from 5,000 in 1989 to
30,000 in 2016 (about a ﬁfth of working-
age adults are employed by Disney). That is
expected to double by 2030. Arnaud de Be-
lenet, the mayor of Bailly-Romainvilliers, a
village south of the commercial centre,
says taxes from Disney and the non-tourist
economy have paid for schools and infra-
structure. He hopes to attract more compa-
nies to the region. But not everyone is
pleased. Hacène Belmessous, whose book
“The New French Happiness, or The World
According to Disney” is a study of Val d’Eu-
rope, criticises it as a privatised space run
by a multinational corporation. It is, he
says, “the death of the public city”. 7

There’s a new chef in town

40 Europe

The Economist August 5th 2017

Charlemagne

Deutschland is dozing

Germany’s placid election ignores the country’s deeper challenges

diﬃcult and divisive choices. “The next three or four years will be
the most demanding since reuniﬁcation,” predicts Timo Lochocki
of the German Marshall Fund of the United States.
Take geopolitics. Germany may be largely happy with the
structure of the European Union, but others are not. France’s pres-
ident, Emmanuel Macron, wants to deepen the integration of the
euro zone in ways that Germans see as reaching into their pock-
ets. America is insisting that German defence spending rise from
1.2% to 2% of GDP. German citizens, meanwhile, seem hesitant
even to endorse their existing military obligations, such as their
deployment in Lithuania. In May just 40% told the Pew Research
Centre that they would back using military force to defend a
NATO ally in a serious conﬂict with Russia.
Economic shifts will also be wrenching. The mighty German
car industry is plagued by cartelism. It will pay a high price for its
ill-advised gamble on diesel engines and it faces further disrup-
tion from the dash towards electriﬁcation and self-driving vehi-
cles. The country’s low investment rate and high energy costs
have hurt its rankings on digital and infrastructural competitive-
ness. That trend is compounded by a conservative attitude to cer-
tain kinds of new technologies. Germans are even more hostile
than the French to a free-trade treaty with America and to big-
data giants like Google. In another backwards-looking move, Mrs
Merkel’s government decided to cut the retirement age. All told,
says Stephan Richter, a pundit, Germany’s “anaesthetic” political
class has not used the country’s golden decade to equip it for the
future: “past performance is no indication of future success.”
The fabric of German society is also in ﬂux. The work of inte-
grating the 1.2m refugees who arrived during 2015 and 2016 is still
at an early stage. Yet the country is not really debating how it
should go about the job. The left avoids the subject, while the
right proposes simply to stamp a traditional German identity on
the newcomers. Few people are hashing out a more realistic vi-
sion for a hybrid, melting-pot form of Germanness. Meanwhile,
as German society has grown more ﬂuid and international, it has
become harder to police. Recent terror attacks in Berlin and Ham-
burg, both committed by migrants who should have been de-
ported but slipped through gaps in the system, have exposed seri-
ous security failings. That poses urgent questions in a country
that is, for historical reasons, neuralgic about state surveillance.
The election season proper will not begin until late August.
But current signs—party manifestos, early rallies and anodyne
television interviews with politicians—suggest that Germany’s
sleepy campaign will leave most of these big issues unattended. 

Time to ﬂush the Ambien
To ﬁnd this worrying is not to belittle the success and stability of
Germany today. But the dramas of 2015, including the rise of the
AfD, show that deep political insecurities lie below the surface,
and that anger can erupt quickly. “The 1,000 most inﬂuential peo-
ple in [Berlin] know there’s a tough time ahead; they need to com-
municate that to voters,” argues Mr Lochocki. Christian Ude, a
former SPD mayor of Munich, goes further, warning in a new
book that the “ﬂight from politics” by the mainstream abandons
terrain to the political extremes. 
With much of the world riven by political strife, it may sound
odd to plead for more of it in one of the few countries that has re-
mained placid. But Mr Ude is right. That Germany is doing well is
not a reason to avoid a little discord. Quite the opposite: it is a
window in which to embrace it constructively. 7

THESE are political times. American democracy produces
more drama in a week than it used to in a year. In France the
forces of globalism and nationalism are locked in combat. In Brit-
ain nation-changing votes have become annual events. Brenda, a
Bristol pensioner interviewed by the BBC in April, spoke for mil-
lions on learning of the early general election: “You’re jokin’!
There’s too much politics going on!”
Germany is diﬀerent. It goes to the polls on September 24th,
but of politics red in tooth and claw there is little evidence. It is a
country calm and comfortable, closer in spirit to Brenda than to
Wagner. Angela Merkel’s centre-right Christian Democrats (CDU)
are coasting to victory on an inoﬀensive manifesto oﬀering
something for everyone. Martin Schulz, her Social Democratic
(SPD) rival, has a tough choice: be confrontational and risk losing
voters to Mrs Merkel’s big tent, or echo her soothing overtures,
leaving voters with little reason to pick him over her. 
At the moment Mr Schulz seems to be combining the worst of
both options. His bids to draw the chancellor into combat, for ex-
ample by claiming that Germany is ill-prepared for future refugee
crises, make him look panicky while underlining her Zen-like
conﬁdence. At the same time both parties’ posters and slogans
are determinedly bland. The CDU calls “for a Germany in which
we live well and happily”. The SPD proclaims that “the future
needs new ideas and someone to implement them”. The Green
party and the liberal FDP have been a bit more stimulating, but a
Schlafwahlkampf, or “sleep election campaign”, looms. 
In a sense, this is to Germany’s credit. With the exception of
the chaotic nationalists in the Alternative for Germany (AfD)
party, German politicians and journalists are less prone to emo-
tionalising politics and manufacturing conﬂict than those in oth-
er countries. Mrs Merkel is a consummate diﬀerence-splitter who
for eight of her 12 years as chancellor has governed comfortably
with the SPD. With some minor diﬀerences of emphasis, she and
Mr Schulz share the same worldview: internationalist, business-
friendly and social democratic. The country is stable and prosper-
ous, a land of whirring factories, sleek trains and bustling lake-
side beer gardens. If it ain’t broke, why ﬁx it?
But that would be a mistake. In the long term, Germany faces
enormous challenges, ones which will force its leaders to make

Br itain

Housing

A nation of homebodies

A little-noticed trend in Britain’s housing market spells trouble for everyone
THE market looked ready for a correc-
moved elsewhere. Credit boomed as
tion. On the eve of the Brexit vote last
banks jumped into the mortgage market
June the median house price in England
alongside building societies. This made it
was 7.7 times median annual earnings,
easier for Britons to take out big home
probably the highest ratio ever recorded.
loans and to move up the housing ladder.
Many assumed that in the uncertainty that
Yet the rate of home-moving tumbled to its
followed the referendum, house prices
lowest level ever in 2009. At that rate, a typ-
might at last slump. They have not. The
ical house would change hands once ev-
market for London’s fanciest properties
ery 25 years. Few wanted to sell as prices
looks weak and overall price growth has
plunged after the onset of the ﬁnancial cri-
slowed, but Britain’s housing market hard-
sis in 2008; no one wants to get less for
ly appears to be in freefall. 
their house than they paid for it.
Poke beneath the surface, however, and
The causes of the current stasis are nu-
it looks as if trouble is brewing. Britons are
merous. One factor is almost certainly the
buying and selling houses less frequently
long-term decline in housing construction.
than they once did. Oﬃcial data suggest
Restrictive planning policy means house-
that the rate of residential transactions this
builders struggle to ﬁnd open land to de-
year is set to be the lowest since 2013. The
velop. Some 50,000 fewer new-build
number of sales in parts of London is ap-
proaching an all-time low as home-buyers
become more cautious about their perso-
nal ﬁnances. 
The post-referendum stagnation in the
number of sales merely reinforces a long-
term trend. Few have noticed, but in recent
decades Britons have become markedly
less inclined to move house (see chart).
The decline in residential transactions may
seem unimportant in comparison with the
high cost of housing. But it leaves all
Britons worse oﬀ. 
The 1980s were a golden age of housing
turnover. Margaret Thatcher’s government
encouraged people to buy their rented
council homes; many then sold them and

Sources: HMRC; DCLG; 
Neal Hudson; Br ian Green;
The Economist

Who’d be an estate agent?

Br itain, housing-market transactions

*England and Wales
†The Economist estimate

As % of pr ivately owned dwellings*

1960

70

90

2000

10

17†

80

15

10

5

0

The Economist August 5th 2017 41

Also in this section
42 Tor ies and housing
43 Brexit contingency planning
43 Investment in skyscrapers
44 Bagehot: A histor y lesson

For daily analysis and debate on Br itain, visit
Economist.com/br itain

houses come to market each year now
than in the 1980s.
Demographic changes are also at work.
An ageing population is a less mobile one.
The way council tax is levied also gives el-
derly folk less incentive to downsize. It was
last updated in 1993 and the priciest homes
are taxed lightly. Meanwhile, more Britons
live alone. Since 1981, the share of house-
holds with one occupant has risen from
20% to nearly 30%. Singletons are less likely
than those with children to need extra
space, so they may not need to move up
the housing ladder. 
Another inﬂuence is the rising burden
of stamp duty. Two decades ago the tax
was hardly signiﬁcant. Yet in the last de-
cade, the average amount of stamp duty
charged per residential transaction has ris-
en by 30% in real terms (though recent
changes have lightened the load slightly
for some). The need to pay thousands of
pounds upfront makes upping sticks hard-
er. According to a recent paper from Chris-
tian Hilber of the London School of Eco-
nomics and Teemu Lyytikäinen of the
VATT Institute for Economic Research,
stamp duty reduces the rate of home-mov-
ing by about a ﬁfth. It partly explains why
home-owners in Britain move home half
as frequently as they do in America, where
the equivalent tax is usually less onerous. 
The biggest reason of all for the slump
in sales, however, may be Britons’
squeezed living standards. In a recent pa-
per Neal Hudson and Brian Green, two
property analysts, point out that people
can only move up the housing ladder if
they have the money to pay the estate
agents and have enough for a deposit. 
Unfortunately, since the 1980s, the
growth rate of real household disposable
income has fallen from about 3% a year to
1%. Things have worsened since Britons
voted to leave the EU as higher inﬂation

1

42 Br itain

2 has eaten away at wages. With poor in-
come growth it becomes harder for home-
owners to amass the savings necessary to
move up the housing ladder. Indeed, the
household savings rate recently reached its
lowest level since records began in 1963. 
Cheap borrowing oﬀsets weak income
growth somewhat, making it easier for
Britons to aﬀord a home. Since 2007 the
Bank of England has cut the base rate, caus-
ing the rate on the average variable mort-
gage to fall from 7% to 4%. But in other ways
borrowing is harder than it was. Interest-
only mortgages are a thing of the past and
regulators have put limits on high loan-to-
income mortgages. Home-owners must in-
stead stump up bigger deposits, say Messrs
Hudson and Green. The average deposit
for ﬁrst-time buyers, meanwhile, is now
roughly equal to the average annual salary.

Broken ladders
A slow housing market leads to all manner
of ills. When people ﬁnd it hard to oﬄoad a
house or to acquire a new one, they are less
likely to move to a better job or a more pro-
ductive part of the country. Instead they
waste time on long commutes. Our analy-
sis of the labour-force survey suggests that
between 2011 and 2016 the number of peo-
ple who spent at least two hours a day
commuting rose by a ﬁfth. All this hits la-
bour productivity, which in Britain has
seen measly growth in recent years. 
Another consequence is ineﬃcient use
of the housing stock. One in three of Brit-
ain’s houses has two or more spare bed-
rooms. Yet overcrowding (as measured by
the number of people relative to the num-
ber of bedrooms) is rising. With grandpar-
ents hogging the bigger, better properties,
their children struggle to move up the
housing ladder.
An ultra-slow property market is also
bad for future generations. For reasons that
economists do not yet understand, there is
a tight correlation between the number of
property transactions and the number of
homes built each year (at a ratio of about
10:1). One possible explanation is that
those building houses focus their eﬀorts on
the top 10% of the market, perhaps because
large houses are especially proﬁtable. A
low rate of property transactions, there-
fore, leads to few houses being built. That
will do nothing for Britons priced out of the
housing market entirely. 
Unfortunately, nothing suggests that
the rate of housing transactions will rise
any time soon. The government has made
noises about trying to get more oldies to
downsize. Yet in a recent policy paper on
housing, there was no mention of any seri-
ous policies to encourage them to do so.
Meanwhile, inﬂation will continue to
erode incomes. And the uncertainty of
Brexit will deepen. The problems caused
by Britain’s gummed-up property market
look set only to get worse. 7

Tor ies and housing

March of the
YIMBYs

Some Conservatives grasp the need for
more homes
AFTER losing its majority, its housing
minister and a clutch of seats in the
suburban south-east, the Conservative
Party seems at last to have reached the lim-
it of its NIMBYism. “The penny didn’t drop
until now,” says Rob Wilson, a Tory MP
who lost his seat in Reading, a commuter
town 40 miles west of London. But the
view that the Conservatives should urge
the building of more houses is at last ﬁlter-
ing throughout the party. The alternative,
according to the Daily Telegraph, the unoﬃ-
cial journal of NIMBYism, is “Marxist so-
cial engineering”. 
A shift is long overdue. A much-trailed
white paper on housing in February—
when the party was riding high in the
polls—was gutted of any radical proposals.
Still, cannier parts of the party have long
argued for more housing. And from a polit-
ical perspective, the Tories’ unwillingness
to boost the supply of homes for people to
buy seems increasingly imprudent. Build-
ing such houses may breed Tories: the
party boasted a huge lead among owner-
occupiers and a slimmer one among voters
with mortgages at the last election, accord-
ing to Ipsos MORI, a pollster. By contrast,
Labour had a 23-point advantage among
private renters. As home-ownership falls,
such a gap could become an existential
problem for the Tory party.
Better-oﬀ young people, who might
otherwise lean towards the Tories, are
most aggrieved about housing, according
to Torsten Bell from the Resolution Foun-
dation, a think-tank. It is among this group
that the gulf between the “vision of the
home they expected to own and the reality
of the home they ﬁnd themselves renting is

The Economist August 5th 2017

most acutely felt,” says Mr Bell.
The political pressure is most intense in
the south-east, where prices have rocketed.
Cheaper housing and better transport
links may tempt Labour voters away from
the capital’s heart where the party domi-
nates, into more marginal constituencies
such as Reading, reckons Mr Wilson. For
now, they are piled up harmlessly in inner
London. Six of the ten biggest majorities
are in Labour-held seats in the capital, of-
ten in once dodgy but now desirable areas
such as Hackney. But even a small diaspora
of lefties could take a bite out of the blue
doughnut of Conservative constituencies
that make up London’s outer suburbs and
nearby towns (see map). Hastings wel-
comed 800 exiles from the capital between
2015 and 2016, who presumably delighted
in being able to buy a four-bedroom house
for the price of a two-bedroom ﬂat in some
of the dingier parts of south London. Its
Tory MP, Amber Rudd, hung on to her seat
by 346 votes.
Nonetheless, some Conservatives are
still channelling St Augustine: Lord, give
me housing—but not here. Building more
homes may win over future Tory voters,
but it risks upsetting the current batch. Sa-
jid Javid, the minister responsible for hous-
ing, insists that councils must persist with
such developments, however unpopular.
He has indicated that he will not obstruct
those that permit some building on the
green belt—where construction is almost
non-existent. 
But
today’s Tory housing policy
amounts to tinkering when compared
with those of previous Tory governments.
Harold Macmillan was tasked with—and
just about achieved—the job of building
300,000 houses a year from 1951. The Con-
servatives were in power for 13 more years.
Current policies fall far short of that sort of
ambition. One Labour wag jokes that: “The
best hope for the Tories is for Labour to win
and enact its policy of mass council house
building, so that they have a big stock of
council houses to sell oﬀ when they get
back in.” 7

S p e a k e r ’ s
s e a t

Oxford West 
& Abingdon

L O N D O N

Hackney South
£611,000

Thurrock
£267,000

Reading East
£356,000

Canterbury

Hastings & Rye
£241,000

General election 2017

Major ity of winning par ty, ’000

<1

1-10 >10

Conservative
Labour
Lib Dem

Green Party

Conservatives lost
seat in 2017

Average house
price, 12 months 
to May 2017

Sources: Electoral Commission; Savills

The Economist August 5th 2017 

Brexit contingency planning

The sucking sound 

Businesses are insuring against a hard
Brexit, often overseas
IT IS a truth universally acknowledged
that business abhors uncertainty, and
nothing is more uncertain than Brexit. Yet
investment decisions must be made, new
products developed and staﬀ hired, even
as March 2019, the date for the end of the
Article 50 negotiations, looms ever closer. 
Many companies, therefore, are invest-
ing heavily in contingency planning. Such
is the concern that the ﬁnancial-services
industry has been obliged to do so by regu-
lators. Some are now acting on those
plans. Given the chaos in the government
over Brexit, that involves preparing for the
worst and pining for the best, including a
transitional deal. In practice, this means
starting to shift jobs and functions out of
Britain. The sucking sound is now audible. 
Banks, which had to have their plans in
place by July 14th, have the most to worry
about in terms of “passporting rights” and
EU-wide regulations. Several have con-
ﬁrmed that some operations will move out
of London to other EU capitals. Bank of
America (BOA) has picked Dublin as its
main base for EU investment banking and
markets operation after Brexit; a small
number, for now, of the 4,500 staﬀ who
currently work in London will move to
new oﬃces there, as well as new hires. Bar-
clays will also be beeﬁng up its existing of-
ﬁce in Dublin to use its EU banking licence
there, again with a mixture of newbies and
transfers from London. 
Goldman Sachs, which employs about
6,000 in Britain, will add hundreds of staﬀ
to its existing EU oﬃces, bringing new peo-
ple and some from London. Some were
cheered by news from Deutsche Bank on
August 1st that it had signed a lease for a
new London headquarters. But it also con-
ﬁrmed that it will move parts of its busi-
ness to Frankfurt. Japanese banks, such as
Nomura and Daiwa, have said that they in-
tend to make Frankfurt the main base for
EU clients. Lloyd’s of London, an insurer,
will open a new subsidiary in Brussels. 
“Everyone is planning around a hard
Brexit,” says Matthew Austen of Oliver
Wyman, a consultancy which reckons the
wholesale-banking sector is on course to
lose 12,000-17,000 jobs. Banks are keeping
these ﬁrst moves to a minimum, to avoid
disruption, but that number could double. 
Such shifts will lead to losses else-
where. Fintech, worth about £7bn annual-
ly, is particularly vulnerable to post-Brexit
restrictions on the movement of EU labour
because an unusually high proportion of

Br itain 43

ploys 30 people in London, but Mr Loizou
is opening an oﬃce in Lisbon, where he
will recruit about ﬁve more. “It’s insur-
ance,” he says, giving him access to EU tal-
ent and the protection of EU regulation.
Companies in other industries are pre-
paring for life outside Britain, too. Julian
Sarkar runs Zanos Aromas, which imports
ingredients for fragrances. It trades mostly
outside the EU, but Mr Sarkar is opening a
new company in Dublin to keep his Euro-
pean business free from any post-Brexit
regulatory tangles. 
Or take European Pubs, which operates
bars and restaurants in French resorts fre-
quented by British skiers. The chief execu-
tive, Charles Owen, has built his ﬁrm on
the back of one bit of EU regulation, the
Posted Workers Directive, which enables
him to send British staﬀ to work in the Alps
for up to ten months a year on British pay
and conditions. Employing EU workers
would add about 40% to his wage bill, he
says, and destroy the business. Mr Owen
wants to open a subsidiary in Dublin so
that he can continue operating in the EU. 
In all these cases, money and resources
that would have been invested in Britain
are now being redirected overseas. And
contingency planning itself costs money
that could otherwise be spent on the core
business. HSBC is the ﬁrst bank publicly to
put a price on Brexit. On July 31st it said that
the associated staﬀ moves, legal fees and
more could add up to $300m.
Businesses have been lobbying more
actively for a soft Brexit since the election
in June. Nonetheless, wise bosses are still
preparing for the harder version. 7

Planning their next move

its executives, coders and designers are
European. Some of the most prominent
companies are implementing their own
contingency plans for
the post-Brexit
world. Taavet Hinrikus, the Estonian co-
founder of Transferwise, a tech unicorn (a
startup valued at more than $1bn), says
that its global headquarters will remain in
London but the company will open a new
headquarters somewhere else in Europe.
Azimo and PPRO, both online money-
transfer businesses, will open oﬃces in
Dublin and Luxembourg respectively. 
Smaller ﬁntech businesses are also get-
ting ready. Cypriot-born Alex Loizou co-
founded Trouva two years ago when, he
says, London was “ten steps ahead” of any-
where in Europe. It provides a platform for
boutiques to sell online. The company em-

Reach for the skyscraper

The “Walkie Talkie”, a London skyscraper, was bought in July by Lee Kum Kee, a Hong
Kong food company, for £1.3bn ($1.7bn), the most paid for a Br itish building. The tum-
bling value of the pound in the wake of the Brexit vote has attracted bargain-hunters
from abroad. With Br itain’s depar ture from the EU looking chaotic and the possibility of a
Labour government that could penalise foreign investors, it remains to be seen whether
this is a good long-term bet. Lee Kum Kee could yet be lef t with sauce on its face.

LONDON

Soho

Mayfair

Hyde
Park

Aldgate
East

a m e s 

T h

Waterloo

City

1 3
5
6

4

The
Shard

Docklands

2

Isle of
Dogs

Height,
metres

183

1

236

2

180

3

306

4

Tower 42

Opened 1981
Owned
Nathan Kirsch
of South Afr ica
Cost £0.3bn

Canary Whar f*

Opened 1991
Owned
Qatar and 
Brookfield of Canada
Cost £2.6bn

The Gherkin

Opened 2004
Owned
Joseph Safra
of Brazil
Cost £0.7bn

Sources: The Skyscraper Centre; press repor ts

The Shard

Opened 2013
Owned
Qatar (95%)
Cost £0.4bn

(contract cost only)

225

kh

5

The Cheesegrater

Opened 2014
Owned
CC Land
of Hong Kong
Cost £1.2bn

160

6

The Walkie Talkie

Opened 2014
Owned
Lee Kum Kee
of Hong Kong
Cost £1.3bn

*Whole development

44 Br itain

The Economist August 5th 2017

Bagehot

A history lesson

The same mindset that lies behind Brexit also lay behind the Iraq war

vring their opponents, meeting in Tate Britain because they knew
that nobody from the Westminster village would ever go there. 
All very impressive. But the parallels also have a darker hue.
The neoconservatives sold the Iraq war on the basis of dodgy
claims about weapons of mass destruction and direct links be-
tween al-Qaeda and Saddam Hussein. The Brexiteers sold Brexit
on the basis of dodgy claims about giving “our NHS the £350m
the EU takes every week”. The neoconservatives insisted that re-
gime change in Iraq would be easy—and would set oﬀ a chain re-
action across the Middle East. Kenneth Adelman called it a “cake-
walk”. Kanan Makiya, a leader of the Iraqi National Congress,
predicted that American troops would be “greeted with sweets
and ﬂowers”. Brexiteers have made strikingly similar claims
about an easy divorce leading to a chain reaction across Europe.
Boris Johnson justiﬁed his belief that Britain could leave the EU
while preserving all the beneﬁts of membership on the grounds
that his “policy on cake is pro having it and pro eating it”. 
In both cases overconﬁdence led to a lamentable lack of plan-
ning. The Americans were so certain that Iraqis wanted regime
change that they did not plan for prolonged resistance or social
breakdown ( John Bolton suggested that, having deposed Sad-
dam, the Americans could give the Iraqis a copy of the Federalist
Papers and scarper). The Brexiteers are so sure that Britain’s desti-
ny lies outside the EU that they have not planned for the sheer dif-
ﬁculty of undoing 45 years of legislation. Charles Moore argued
in the Spectator during the Brexit campaign that “it is crucial to the
‘leave’ cause that it resist the temptation to set out a plan”. One of
the best books on the Iraq war is entitled “Fiasco”. The title could
well suit an account of Britain’s Brexit negotiations.
Philip Hammond, Britain’s chancellor, is doing his best to
tame Brexit, much as Colin Powell tried to tame the Iraq war. He is
urging a “long transition” of two or three years after Britain leaves
the EU during which trading relations will remain much as they
are and Britain will continue to pay into the European budget
much as it does now. He has ruled out adopting “the Singapore
option” of radically reducing taxes and regulations. He has also
argued that “literally nobody” wants to see a dramatic fall in mi-
gration immediately after Brexit. Prominent Labour ﬁgures, such
as Sadiq Khan, London’s mayor, also want continuity, arguing
that Britain should remain a member of the single market.

Look back in anger
Perhaps these moderates have hit on a formula that will allow
Britain to disentangle itself painlessly from Europe. But William
Hague, a former Tory leader, is probably closer to the truth when
he worries that Brexit may become “the occasion of the greatest
economic, diplomatic and constitutional muddle in the modern
history of the UK”. Both the main parties are split over crucial
questions such as membership of the single market. When Parlia-
ment returns, the government faces weeks of angry debates and
nail-biting votes over the “Great Repeal Bill”. In the longer term it
will probably face a rebellion by Conservative ultras who would
rather see their party destroyed than Brexit diluted.
The real problem with the Brexiteers is that they don’t spend
enough time studying history. Since the mid-17th century the Brit-
ish have had a marked suspicion of radical change. They prefer
their revolutions to be “glorious”—that is directed from above
and dedicated to gradual change. And they insist that the popular
opinion should be qualiﬁed and diluted by constitutional con-
straints. Leaps in the dark are supposed to be for foreigners. 7

ONE of the striking things about the Brexiteers is how keen
they are on history. Many studied it at university, usually Ox-
ford: Bill Cash, John Redwood and Chris Grayling from the older
generation and Daniel Hannan, Dominic Cummings and Dou-
glas Carswell from the younger. They rest their argument for
Brexit as much on historical exceptionalism as on economic logic.
Britain is simply too diﬀerent from continental European powers,
with their Napoleonic codes and Verfassungspatriotismus, to ﬁt
in. And they relish historical parallels: between Brexit and Henry
VIII’s break with Rome; between the Brexiteers and the anti-Corn
Law activists who destroyed 19th-century England’s equivalent
of the Common Agricultural Policy; and between the legislation
that will translate European law into British law and the 1832
Great Reform Act. Nigel Farage, the least cerebral of the Brexiteers,
has encouraged young Britons to see “Dunkirk”, a new ﬁlm, to
stiﬀen their spines for the struggle ahead.
Bagehot would like to point to a more recent historical analo-
gy: between the Brexiteers and the American neoconservatives
who persuaded George W. Bush to invade Iraq. The comparison
might sound provocative—a bloody war and a peaceful referen-
dum diﬀer hugely. Nevertheless, striking parallels exist between
the way that the neoconservatives and the Brexiteers think about
the world. Indeed, there is even an overlap in personnel. Michael
Gove wrote an essay on “the very British roots of neoconserva-
tism and its lessons for British conservatives”, and Liam Fox is a
familiar ﬁgure in Washington’s neocon circles. 
The neoconservatives were a group of maverick intellectuals
who exercised inﬂuence out of all proportion to their numbers.
Ditto the Brexiteers. The neocons worked their magic by focusing
on a single aim (regime change in the Middle East, starting with
Iraq) and pursuing it with tireless energy. Ditto again. The Brexi-
teers are in some ways more remarkable than the neocons, who
had only to outmanoeuvre the American defence-and-intelli-
gence establishment, which preferred containment to regime
change. The Brexiteers had to outmanoeuvre their own side. The
young ones understood that Brexit was doomed so long as it was
associated with ageing monomaniacs like Bill Cash, and ﬂame-
ﬂowing populists like Nigel Farage. They were as brilliantly ruth-
less in sidelining their soulmates as they were in outmanoeu-

International

The Economist August 5th 2017 45

Transport

The price of jam

on fuel and on car ownership. Neither pe-
nalises driving in congested conditions,
which causes extra pollution and crimps
productivity by delaying workers and de-
liveries, and disrupting supply chains. And
although congestion zones help, they are
blunt instruments; ideally, road pricing
would adjust to traﬃc ﬂows in real time.
Yet economists are not normal people.
Most voters hate taxes on driving. Even if
they grudgingly accept existing ones, they
squeal about any increases. In Britain,
which Margaret Thatcher called a “great
car-owning democracy”, duties on fuel
have been frozen since 2011 following pres-
sure from drivers’ groups. Nineteen Ameri-
can states have not raised their “gas taxes”
in at least a decade; Oklahoma’s levy has
been frozen for 30 years.

The not-so-fast and the furious
Many drivers would rather “pay” by queu-
ing than through road-pricing. The Nether-
lands hoped to run a 60,000-vehicle trial
of road-pricing in 2011, on the way to a na-
tionwide scheme. But opposition politi-
cians and motoring organisations fought
so hard that the plans were dropped. 
Governments will nevertheless soon
have to ﬁnd new ways of making drivers
pay. That is not because congestion will
worsen otherwise—though it will. Rather,
tax revenue from motoring is drying up. 
One reason for this is the spread of ride-
hailing and ride-sharing. In London driv-
ers for ﬁrms like Uber can circulate all day
inside the CCZ, picking up fares, while be-
ing exempt from the charge. The number
of private-hire vehicles that entered the
zone at least once rose from 50,000 in
March 2013 to 85,000 in November 2016.
The number of licensed drivers rose from 

1

1

Road-pricing has long been a good idea. Today it is an urgent one 
IN 1868 the world’s ﬁrst traﬃc light was in-
how much and where drivers use the
stalled outside the Houses of Parliament.
roads. Singapore, which already has the
The gaslit signal controlled the ﬂow of Lon-
world’s most comprehensive road-pricing
don carriages—at least for a few weeks. For,
system, is introducing a new one in 2020
soon enough, the gas ignited. The resulting
that uses cars’ global positioning systems
explosion knocked the helmet oﬀ a police-
(GPS) to charge motorists more precisely.
man’s head, and left him badly burned. 
Other schemes are being tried out in Amer-
Eﬀorts to ease congestion no longer lit-
ican states such as California and Oregon. 
erally blow up in your face, but recent
All of which pleases economists. Using
schemes have run into trouble, too. In 2003
prices to ration a scarce resource, such as
Ken Livingstone, then London’s mayor, in-
space on busy roads at busy times, makes
troduced a congestion-charging
zone
sense. Those who consume a good should
(CCZ). Motorists pay up to £11.50 a day
pay for it. Road-pricing is also more eﬃ-
($15.20) to drive into the centre of the city.
cient than the typical ways drivers are
Since 2000 the number of cars entering
charged for imposing costs on others: taxes
central London has fallen by nearly a quar-
ter. But congestion is rising again (see chart
1), a result of vans and taxis clocking up
more miles within the zone, as well as new
lanes for buses and Lycra-clad commuters
that have reduced the road space for cars.
More minutes are lost to delays than before
the CCZ. The average vehicle speed has
fallen from 19.9 miles (32.0km) per hour in
2013 to 17.7mph (28.5kph) in 2016. 
In response, London, like other heaving
parts of the world, is looking at a more rad-
ical approach to reduce congestion. In Jan-
uary the London Assembly, the elected
body that oversees the mayor, published a
report calling for the city to develop a sys-
tem of road-pricing that varies by when,

London traf f ic, weekday af ternoon rush hour
Central
Inner
Outer
Average speed
Average delays*

*Extra time it takes to travel 1km
at rush hour versus at night

3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0

London stalling

2007 10

15

2007 10

15

kph

Minute per km

30
25
20
15
10
5
0

Source: Transpor t
for London

46 International

2 67,000 to 115,500 over the same period. (In
the future self-driving cars may replace
these workers, further depleting govern-
ment coﬀers, since there will be fewer car
owners to tax.) In total private-hire vehi-
cles make up 38% of car traﬃc in central
London, almost double the share of tradi-
tional black taxis. 
The second reason for dwindling rev-
enue—increasingly eﬃcient cars—is even
more important. Cars’ fuel eﬃciency has
roughly doubled in the past 25 years (see
chart 2). Partly as a result, the tax take from
fuel and vehicle duties in Britain has de-
clined by £812m per year in real terms over
the past ﬁve years, according to Gergely
Raccuja, an economist who on July 13th
won the Wolfson prize, an economics
competition run by Policy Exchange, a Brit-
ish think-tank, for a paper on road taxation.
During the same period the total amount
of miles driven increased. 
Electric vehicles will further widen the
gap between traﬃc and taxes. Paal Brevik
Wangsness of the Institute of Transport
Economics in Norway, the country where
electric-car ownership is highest, points
out that electric vehicles not only incur no
fuel duty, but often attract government
subsidies. British drivers, for example, can
get £4,500 oﬀ the cost of electric cars such
as a Nissan Leaf or a Tesla Model X. Even if
these types of subsidies fall as cars become
cheaper, they will require infrastructure
such as charging points and cables.

Get your motor runnin’
For Mr Raccuja, a fair and radical way to
pay for the costs of car use would be to
scrap duties on fuel and ownership, and re-
place them with a “road tax”. His new levy
would be a per-mile charge that varied de-
pending on a car’s weight and emissions,
thereby making drivers with road-crush-
ing and air-polluting vehicles pay more. Mr
Raccuja notes that the charge could also be
higher in more congested places. 
Such schemes will doubtless infuriate
motorists. But there are reasons to believe
that a shift toward road-pricing is not just
increasingly urgent, but also more plausi-
ble. London’s CCZ was brought in against
stiﬀ opposition. Today just one-ﬁfth of Lon-
doners oppose the idea of a more sophisti-
cated road-pricing scheme, according to
the London Assembly. After a seven-
month trial in 2006, Stockholm residents
voted narrowly by 53% to 47% to make the
city’s congestion zone permanent. But by
2011 polls showed that about 70% of resi-
dents backed the scheme. 
Car owners may become less of a politi-
cal force, at least in cities, as people opt
against getting behind the wheel. In many
rich countries the share of 20-somethings
with driving licences is falling. The number
of car-less households in America de-
clined from 1960, when the US Census be-
gan tracking it, until 2010, since when the

More in the tank

United States, 1960=100

Vehicle-miles travelled

Fuel
consumption,
gallons

1960

70

80

90

2000

10 15

Source: US Bureau of Transpor tation Statistics

2

500

400

300

200

100

0

tally has begun to tick up. McKinsey, a con-
sultancy, estimates that one in ten vehicles
sold by 2030 will be for ride-sharing. 
Technology will also make it easier to
try road-pricing, including in poorer cities
like Jakarta and Bangkok, where traﬃc is
horriﬁc. In the past, schemes might have
relied on cameras to recognise number
plates. Today transponders can ping a ra-
dio signal used to track a car’s movement.
But even that gizmo will soon be obsolete.
Many premium vehicles are already con-
nected to the internet using mobile-phone
networks. By 2020 most new cars will
come with these connections as standard.
Together with GPS technology that means
it will become easier to track the use of ve-
hicles wherever they are.
Singapore is the model others will try to
follow. The world’s ﬁrst CCZ was intro-
duced there in 1975. It used paper permits to
control access to a central zone until
switching to electronic sensors in 2008. If
average speeds are deemed too slow over a
three-month period, then the city raises
the cost of entrance. According to Woo Sian
Boon of Singapore’s Land Transport Au-
thority, congestion has fallen as motorists

The Economist August 5th 2017

have switched to less busy routes or to the
city-state’s public transport, or travelled at
oﬀ-peak times when charges are low. 
From 2020 Singapore will take an even
more sophisticated approach. It will use
GPS to vary the amount drivers pay based
on distance, time, location and vehicle.
The scheme will reduce the need for the
unsightly gantries that log drivers in and
out. Drivers will receive real-time informa-
tion about the cost and busyness of roads,
encouraging them to consider other routes. 
Although less ambitious than Singa-
pore’s plans, several American states are
using technology to experiment, too. The
likes of California and Colorado have ac-
cepted federal grants for trials of various
pay-to-drive schemes. The biggest, OReGO
in Oregon, started in 2015. Around 1,500
people have signed up. Drivers have de-
vices ﬁtted in their cars that take data from
the engines’ computers. The gadgets record
the amount of fuel used and distance dri-
ven, and transmit the data via mobile net-
works. Motorists are charged based on
how far they drive, with each mile costing
1.5 cents, whatever the location or time.
Any state fuel tax they have paid (30 cents a
gallon) is refunded. 
The aim of OReGO is relatively narrow:
to ﬁnd a way to protect state taxes on mo-
toring, even as cars become more fuel-eﬃ-
cient. Whether it will replace the state fuel
tax is unclear. Nevertheless, innovative
schemes such as OReGO may start to
weaken the taboo against new taxes. 
They also raise concerns about how
motorists’ data are used. Tech ﬁrms and
carmakers are competing for access to the
reams of data that drivers create. This can
be used to sell them additional services
based on location (take a journey on a hot
day and your car may tell you where to
pull in for an ice cream), the state of their
vehicle (by using sensors to suggest main-
tenance) or the way they drive (by sharing
data with insurance companies). Firms can
also aggregate data to help create the algo-
rithms for driverless vehicles.
Although Singapore’s authorities may
not fret much about privacy, others do. The
American Civil Liberties Union, an advo-
cacy group, has been active in Oregon; it
worries about data leaking or being stolen.
In 2015 the Texas A&M Transportation Insti-
tute, a think-tank, pointed out that it is of-
ten unclear who owns drivers’ data and
whether they are anonymised.

Head out on the highway
Clearing this up is possible. And once mo-
torists have become used to the idea of
paying for the road space they take up,
rates could be tweaked to account for the
noise, pollution and the risk of collisions in
each location. For the time being govern-
ments, national and metropolitan, are pro-
ceeding cautiously. But as fuel-tax rev-
enues dry up, that is sure to change. 7

Business

Pr ivatisation in France

National treasures 

P A R I S 

The French state is mismanaging its valuable corporate assets 
ONE reason for Italian anger over the
who oversaw the sales and who pressed
decision on July 27th by Emmanuel
for the disposal of Groupe ADP, a large
Macron, France’s president, to stop Fincan-
company that owns the main airports in
tieri, a shipbuilder from Trieste, winning
Paris, at Charles de Gaulle and Orly. 
control of a French shipyard at Saint-Na-
Mr Macron left oﬃce before he could
zaire, was that recent cross-border deals
ﬁnish the job and ADP remains 50.6% state-
have mostly gone France’s way. Italian
owned. But under his economic team, led
businesspeople have grown nervous
by politicians drawn from the centre-right,
about French ﬁrms’ “colonisation” by
its sale looks all but inevitable (and should
means of acquisitions in luxury goods, me-
raise some €7bn). An obvious bidder is
dia and telecoms, including the €46bn
Vinci, a French infrastructure ﬁrm. Yet pri-
($55bn) merger between Luxottica, an Ital-
vatising airports only goes so far. The ques-
ian maker of spectacles, and France’s Essi-
tion is what comes next. Mr Macron’s gov-
lor, announced in January (the group’s
ernment will soon, probably after the
headquarters will be in Paris). The bad
taste will linger even if the two govern-
ments strike a deal over Saint-Nazaire by
the autumn, as they have pledged. 
Yet Mr Macron’s move has been even
more dismaying for those at home who
want the state to get on with privatisation.
During his presidential run Mr Macron
promised to raise €10bn from sales of
some of the state’s sprawling portfolio of
holdings in ﬁrms. The aim was to pay for a
new fund to help other companies invest
in innovation. His threat to nationalise the
Saint-Nazaire yard (rather than cede con-
trol to Fincantieri) is a retrograde step. 
The direction of travel was supposed to
be towards sell-oﬀs. For the past few years
the French state has been quietly disposing
of its stakes in various regional airports, in-
cluding Lyon, Nice and Toulouse. It was Mr
Macron, as economy minister in 2015-16,

Employees at state-owned f irms, end-2012, ’000

L’Etat, c ’est nous

Source: Cour des Comptes

Selected countr ies

200

400

600

800

United States

Br itain

Norway

Poland

Germany

Spain

Canada

Japan

0

France

Italy

The Economist August 5th 2017 47

Also in this section
48 Scr ipps Networks, discovered
49 Pharma ﬁrms unite
49 Proﬁting from the Belt and Road
50 Europe goes out-of-oﬃce
51 Schumpeter: King Kong

For daily coverage of business, visit
Economist.com/business-ﬁnance 

summer, announce its plan for ADP and
say which other stakes are to be sold oﬀ. 
A smaller role for the state in business is
long overdue. A couple of decades after
most countries in western Europe sold oﬀ
many of their corporate holdings, France
still has a huge portfolio. According to a re-
port in January by the Cour des Comptes,
an independent public auditor, the state
has investments in nearly 1,800 ﬁrms,
holdings which together are worth almost
€100bn. The state-owned sector in France
employs nearly 800,000 people, the most
of all the countries surveyed by the Cour
des Comptes (see chart). The number of
ﬁrms in which the state has a majority
stake has been rising since around 2006.
Public holdings are mainly managed by
the Agence des participations de l’État
(APE), by Bpifrance, a public-investment
fund and the Caisse des Dépôts et Consig-
nations (CDC), a state investment bank.
The Cour des Comptes reckons the trio are
doing a poor job; its report was scathing
about public management of corporate as-
sets over the decades (while recognising
some recent improvements). It laments a
lack of purpose in ownership and chronic
failures of supervision, for example in the
collapse of Areva, a nuclear ﬁrm 92%
owned by the state. One curse for EDF, an
energy utility that is another big holding,
was being made to absorb some of Areva’s
struggling business last year.
The auditor also sees confusion be-
tween the three agencies, describes overall
ﬁnancial losses in recent years, poor gover-
nance and concludes that “the state has dif-
ﬁculty being a good shareholder”. Even
more damning is the verdict of a former
boss of APE, David Azéma, who ran it until
2014. His experience, he explains, taught
him that lumbering, publicly owned com-
panies always lose value to nimbler com-
petition. Political meddling hurts, he says, 

1

48 Business

The Economist August 5th 2017

In a state

France, return on equity, %

Selected state-owned and listed companies

SBF 120 index

15

10

Caisse des dépôts
et consignations

Agence des
par ticipations
de l'État 

2010

11

12

13

14

15

Source: Cour des Comptes

+

0

5

–

5

10

15

2 as when ministers rather than boards pick
chief executives—who cannot be sacked
however badly they perform.
Politicians also bully, he says, citing
pressure last year on EDF, forcing it to agree
against managers’ wishes to ﬁnance and
build Hinkley Point C, a nuclear power sta-
tion in Britain that risks becoming a huge ﬁ-
nancial liability. Mr Azéma urges France
“massively” to reduce the state’s stakes in
all listed companies, or at least create
proxy boards to block political meddling.
All these problems help explain why
the value of the 13 listed companies man-
aged by the APE, worth some €66bn as of
mid-July, has declined in recent years. The
performance of a few big ﬁrms, notably
nuclear and energy companies, was partic-
ularly awful. Most striking is the withering
of EDF, 83.4% owned by the state. The utili-
ty’s share price was €86 in 2007 and has
fallen to under €9. Despite generating over
€71bn in annual revenue, the company,
which has enormous liabilities, is valued
at less than €26bn. 
Politicians do show a new readiness to
divest public holdings, partly because the
national budget needs revenue. Trade un-
ions, too, are likelier to accept at least limit-
ed change. Support for hardline unions has
declined, notably with the emergence this
year of the reform-minded CFDT as the sin-
gle-largest union. Asked about sales of
public assets, its leader, Laurent Berger,
says it would be “idiotic” to separate the
state from strategic sectors, but that his
members could accept changes on a “case-
by-case basis”. 
Yet some politicians are said to be lob-
bying to delay sales of public assets, argu-
ing that innovation funds could instead be
raised by setting aside cashﬂow from the
ﬁrms. State bodies have grown cannier in
ﬁnding ways of preserving their inﬂuence
over companies, even as they reduce own-
ership. The APE’s holding in Safran, a big
aeronautical and defence ﬁrm that has
thrived in recent years, for example, has
been cut from 30% in 2010 to just 14% this
year. Yet the state retains nearly one-quar-
ter of voting rights. It keeps other leverage,
especially in the defence industry where it

is a huge customer. It might further cut its
holdings in Safran and could reduce its cur-
rent 26% in another defence ﬁrm, Thales
(that stake is worth just over €5bn). But it is
less likely that the state would sharply re-
duce its 11% holding in Airbus, a plane
manufacturer, that is worth some €6bn. 
Mr Macron is not entirely hands-oﬀ in
his attitude to public assets and his deci-
sion about Saint-Nazaire shows a willing-
ness to meddle in private ones too. As
economy minister in 2015 he increased the
state’s stake in Renault, a big carmaker, by
4.7 percentage points, to nearly 20%, in or-
der to force the ﬁrm to obey a new law giv-
ing double-voting rights to long-term
shareholders (ie, the state). That infuriated
Nissan, Renault’s other big shareholder.
Government oﬃcials now talk about sell-
ing some of the stake.
Will Mr Macron and his team dare in-
troduce radical changes? Probably not. A
likelier outcome is a gradual slicing away
of parts of public holdings. Bruno Le Maire,
the ﬁnance minister, talks of the state step-
ping back slowly from holding corporate
assets. That would probably mean trim-
ming its €5bn stake in Orange, formerly
France Telecom, for example. 
The chairman of two large companies,
one with a large state stake, suggests that in
the end the role of state is “too important in
French economic life” to be changed quick-
ly. An oﬃcial at the state-owned railways
ﬁrm, SNCF, concurs. That ﬁrm devours bil-
lions in subsidies, but is popular with the
public who would not countenance its pri-
vatisation, or that of any other ﬁrm seen as
“strategic”. Outright privatisation of air-
ports might soon be inevitable, but other
changes are likely to come one step at a
time, with some in the wrong direction. 7

Discover y and Scr ipps

Fuzzy signal

N EW Y O R K

Discovery’s purchase of Scripps means
American TV could get a lot cheaper
FORGET your subscription to Netﬂix.
Would you pay $5 a month for a collec-
tion of TV channels that gave you pro-
grammes such as “90 Day Fiancé”, “Pit
Bulls and Parolees”, “My Cat from Hell”,
“Worst Cooks in America” and “Shark
Week”? Irresistible as this may seem, it is
not yet on oﬀer. But many believe that it
has come closer. Discovery, a cable-net-
work group, agreed on July 31st to buy an-
other: Scripps Networks Interactive, own-
er of Food Network and HGTV, among
other channels, in a $14.6bn deal. The com-
bined ﬁrm will have 19 lifestyle- and reali-
ty-television-oriented channels including

Another fat bundle

Animal Planet, DIY Network, Travel Chan-
nel and the ﬂagship Discovery Channel
(home of “Shark Week”). 
The impetus for the combination is the
declining market in America for expensive
pay-TV bundles of 200 channels, which
can cost close to $100 a month. In the past
few years millions of consumers have
spurned such bloated packages for cheap-
er streaming services like Netﬂix and Ama-
zon Prime video. Sales of digital-TV anten-
nae, used to receive broadcast networks
without a cable subscription, have surged
to 7.4m last year. Discovery Channel has
lost more than 8m subscribers in ﬁve years,
a decline of about 8% (chieﬂy because of
the decline of fat bundles). 
It might seem unwise to add more cable
networks by buying Scripps. Discovery of-
fered a 34% premium on its price. Viacom,
another channel group, had also been bid-
ding, which is likely to have increased the
price. “Scripps picked the right time to sell
and Discovery picked the wrong time to
buy,” notes Michael Nathanson of Moﬀett-
Nathanson, a research ﬁrm. Executives at
Discovery argue, though, that distributors
such as Charter and Comcast should be
able to entice consumers with much
cheaper pay-TV options. The total whole-
sale cost of Discovery and Scripps’ 19 chan-
nels is $3 per subscriber a month, less than
half of the cost of just one of Disney’s chan-
nels, ESPN. “We’re really good value,” says
David Leavy, a Discovery executive. 
Yet he will face signiﬁcant hurdles in
persuading distributors or consumers of
that worth. Distributors have struck agree-
ments with large competitors of Discovery,
such as Time Warner and 21st Century Fox,
that limit the selling of too many alterna-
tive bundles (such as the kind that Discov-
ery would like to sell) that exclude their
channels. In addition, pay-TV providers
believe that customers want live entertain-
ment, especially sport, and that if they do
not oﬀer networks such as ESPN, consum-

1

The Economist August 5th 2017 

2 ers will have all the more reason to drop ca-
ble for Netﬂix. Streaming services like You-
Tube, Hulu and Sling sell “skinny” TV
bundles that include the more expensive
sports networks, and mostly exclude Dis-
covery’s cheap channels. 
A $5-a-month option may yet emerge,
however. Rich Greenﬁeld of BTIG, a re-
search ﬁrm, believes the growing antennae
sales indicate a hunger for inexpensive op-
tions. Non-sports bundles of cheaper
channels, from the likes of Discovery and
Viacom, are inevitable. In the future, Mr
Leavy says, Discovery may even wish to
sell direct to the consumer. 
But will the oﬀering be compelling
enough to stand out? Netﬂix and Amazon
can make the sort of reality shows that Dis-
covery and Scripps oﬀer. Some producers
of their content are being directly ap-
proached by streaming services to make
content for them. It does not cost much to
make “Cupcake Wars” or “House Hunt-
ers”. “It all comes down to what are your
barriers to entry,” Mr Nathanson says.
“What moats have you built? How defen-
dable are those moats?” At least Discovery
can infest them with sharks. 7

Drug ﬁrms

Pharma frenemies

A rush for immunotherapy drugs
means new bedfellows
THE modern pharmaceutical ﬁrm lives
or dies on the strength of its drug port-
folio. As patents expire on lucrative medi-
cines, they must replace the income that
has been lost by inventing new drugs, or
buying them in from outside. Both paths
are expensive. But the costs of failure are
greater, and this is how it was possible for a
large and successful ﬁrm—such as British-
based AstraZeneca—to shed 15% of its mar-

Ganging up on cancer

Expected combinations of the two major
categor ies of new oncology drugs*

F O R E C A S T

2014 15

16

17

18

19

20

21

40

30

20

10

0

Source: OncoTherapy
Network

*Targeted and
immunotherapy

ket value in a single day last week. Around
£10bn ($13.2bn) was lost on news of disap-
pointing results in one of its clinical trials
(its shares have since rebounded by 4%).
The trial was to ﬁnd out if a pair of drugs
would treat a form of lung cancer. The
drug, Imﬁnzi, and the experimental drug
tremelimumab, belong to a new category
of
immunotherapy medicines
called
“checkpoint inhibitors”. Similar drugs are
made by Bristol Myers Squibb (BMS), by
Merck in America and Roche, a Swiss ﬁrm.
In an interim ﬁnding, it was reported that
Astra’s combination did not oﬀer an im-
provement over therapies already on the
market. John Rountree, a partner with No-
vasecta, a consultancy, says the results sug-
gest it is still early days for immuno-oncol-
ogy R&D, not that there is something
wrong with the technology. Last year, BMS
lost 16% of its market value after a failed
trial of Opdivo, another checkpoint inhibi-
tor, in lung cancer. 
The promise of these drugs means the
market has become crowded. It is harder
for later entrants such as AstraZeneca,
whose drug Imﬁnzi is the ﬁfth checkpoint
inhibitor that came to market, but it has a
wide portfolio of good immuno-oncology
drugs, which means it can oﬀer these in
combinations—something that is expected
to oﬀer a therapeutic beneﬁt to patients.
Yet as the number of checkpoint inhibi-
tors and immunotherapy drugs rises, the
number of such potential combinations of
treatments is growing (see chart), which
could mean many expensive clinical trials
for pharma companies. They must decide
how to obtain the best sets of drugs. Merg-
ers and acquisitions to get the right treat-
ments look expensive (research from No-
vasecta found that last year the median
price of a pharma ﬁrm was 39 times its rev-
enue, compared with 19 times in 2015 and 8
times in 2014). 
Instead, pharma ﬁrms that have com-
peted ﬁercely for decades have decided
that sometimes it is better to co-operate.
Last week, Merck bought half the rights to
AstraZeneca’s Lynparza in a deal worth
$8.5bn. The ﬁrms will co-develop and sell a
drug known as a “PARP inhibitor”. It will

Business 49

be developed in combination with check-
point inhibitors made by both ﬁrms. In Jan-
uary this year Merck also expanded its ex-
isting collaboration with Eli Lilly to study
how the drug Lartruvo, a targeted cancer
drug, acts with Merck’s Keytruda. On July
25th Eli Lilly said it will out-license or co-
develop one-third of its oncology pipeline.
There are many more examples. 
The industry is convinced that collabo-
ration is needed in immuno-oncology,
reckons McKinsey, a consulting ﬁrm. Work-
ing together is an eﬀective way to mix lab-
oratory talent and to bring medicines to
patients, adds Mr Rountree. It is evidence
of this drive to ﬁnd combinations of drugs
that most of the hundreds of trials of the
top two checkpoint inhibitors on the mar-
ket are led by ﬁrms or institutions other
than the company that actually owns the
drug, says McKinsey. 
If the collaborations turn out to work,
the industry will have advanced in two im-
portant ways. First, it would mean that
pharma has found a way to create value for
its shareholders aside from the expensive
and unpredictable route of M&A. Second,
the deals could drive eﬃciency in an in-
dustry that is struggling with productivity.
Studies show that pharma productivity
(measured by the number of new molecu-
lar entities created per billion dollars of in-
vestment) has been declining for most of
the industry’s history. There is no denying
that the deals are complex to arrange, legal-
ly speaking, but being awkward frenemies
could be worth it. 7

China’s grand project

Where the twain
shall meet

Western multinationals are coining it
along China’s One Belt, One Road 
“MUTUAL beneﬁt, joint responsibil-
ity and shared destiny,” sings a
choir of enthusiastic schoolgirls in a music
video called “The Belt and Road, Sing
Along” from Xinhua, a news service run by
the Chinese government, that mixes shots
of cranes and shipping containers with
people enjoying foreign landmarks. West-
ern ﬁrms are scarcely less optimistic.
Launched by China in 2013, the One Belt,
One Road policy, known as OBOR, has two
parts. There is a land-based “belt” from
China to Europe, evoking old Silk Road
trade paths, then a “road” referring to an-
cient maritime routes. 
OBOR will span 65 countries (see map
on next page), and China has so far invest-
ed over $900bn in projects ranging from
highways in Pakistan to railway lines in
Thailand. Western multinationals, spot-

1

50 Business

London

Moscow

Rotterdam

Venice

Istanbul

Rail route

European productivity

The Economist August 5th 2017

Le long layoﬀ

Europe’s no business as usual summer
“DON’T you know about our sum-
mer?” asks a spokesperson of a
Swedish multinational, himself presum-
ably on holiday as kids chirp in the back-
ground. Almost everyone is gone until
September, he says. At a German multi-
national, “the whole board is away for
August,” admits a spokesperson. Faced
with a slew of out-of-oﬃce messages
across corporate Europe, there seems
little choice for a business correspondent
but to report on the phenomenon itself. 
The practice of collectively taking July
or August oﬀ dates from the Industrial
Revolution, when it made sense to send
oﬀ all assembly-line workers simulta-
neously. In England’s north entire fac-
tories used to descend on the same re-
sorts. As any tourist who has found
themselves in front of an cream shop that
is closed during a sizzling southern Euro-
pean summer will know, it has spread
beyond factory jobs. 
Until 2015 France had a rule that man-
dated some bakeries to stay open in
August, so that Parisians—or rather tour-
ists, because no chic Parisian wants to be
seen in town during the summer—
wouldn’t be deprived of baguettes. So
empty is the city that month that the
average speed of cars on a key ring road
jumps from 38kph (24mph) to 52kph.
Some of the best restaurants in Cyprus
close in the tourist season. “Summer is
near and Frankie will take a nap for a
while,” says the site of Frankie’s Social, a
trendy bar in Limassol. 
Much of Milan becomes deserted as
well. In the artsy district of Brera, Rita
Zubelli runs an ice-cream parlour with
her parents and brother. It will close shop

for two weeks shortly. Why not hire
someone to serve tourists? Italian law
has stricter rules for ﬁrms with non-
family members—the staﬀ toilet would
have to be moved from the basement. 
It is not only the south that goes in for
summer sloth. Production workers at
Porsche, a German carmaker, are on a
compulsory three-week break. In Nor-
way fellesferie refers to a period of col-
lective leave in July, when many ﬁrms
shut and services including banks run on
summer hours. In the Netherlands the
bouwvak still means that many construc-
tion workers must take three weeks oﬀ in
July and August. The timing is doubly
puzzling for the industry because de-
mand is strong and summer is the best
time to build in a wet country. Even some
police stations are shut in August. Pre-
sumably crime takes a break, too.
Though Europe’s appetite for summer
holidays is easy to mock, of the ten most
productive countries in the world
(judged by per-hour productivity) only
one—America, in ﬁfth place—is not in
Europe. Still, in several countries in-
cluding Germany and the Netherlands,
workers and trade unions have begun to
press for more ﬂexible leave policies; not
everyone wants to go on holiday at a set
time when prices are highest. 
Firms that trade globally have had to
adapt to demand from those parts of the
world—especially Asia—that do not slow
over summer and that expect someone in
Europe to answer the phone. But though
the European summer may spread itself
out a little more over the year, there is
scant sign that Europeans will cut down
on their beach and mountain time.

mation collated by the Reconnecting Asia
Project, run by the Centre for Strategic and
International Studies, a think-tank in
Washington, DC, shows that 86% of OBOR
projects have Chinese contractors, 27%
have local ones and only 18% have contrac-
tors of foreign origin. 
Chinese ﬁrms are moving beyond con-
tract work to become operators of projects
and investors too. Their Western competi-
tors may win lots of business in the OBOR
countries only for as long as their techno-
logical advantage lasts. That lead in turn
will be eroded as Western companies
work with Chinese partners on OBOR. In
2016 alone, ABB did business with more
than 400 Chinese enterprises, helping
them adjust for huge diﬀerences in con-
struction and engineering
standards

across countries. Such ﬁrms will learn and
advance in the process. 
Yet for now, Western companies are fo-
cused on the opportunities. Jean-Pascal Tri-
coire, the Hong Kong-based chief executive
of Schneider Electric, a French energy-ser-
vices ﬁrm, says that for his company OBOR
is one of the most important plans of the
early part of this century. Honeywell has
recently formed a team called “East to
Rest” that manages sales and marketing to
mainland ﬁrms that are expanding abroad.
As a goateed singer in Xinhua’s music vid-
eo promises Chinese viewers, “when Belt
and Road reaches Europe, Europe’s red
wine is delivered to the doorstep half a
month earlier”. For years to come, OBOR
looks likely to be the toast of Western
boardrooms, too. 7

Madrid

Athens

Tehran

Land route
“One Belt”

Kolkata

Hambantota

Beijing

Xi’an
Zhanjiang

Mombasa

Sea route
“One Road”

Kuala
Lumpur

2

ting a bonanza, are selling billions of dol-
lars of equipment, technology and ser-
vices to Chinese ﬁrms building along it.
America’s General Electric (GE) made
sales of $2.3bn in equipment orders from
OBOR projects in 2016, almost three times
the total for the previous year. John Rice,
the ﬁrm’s vice-chair, expects the ﬁrm to en-
joy double-digit growth in revenues along
OBOR in coming years. Other ﬁrms, such
as Caterpillar, Honeywell, and ABB, global
engineering giants, DHL, a logistics com-
pany, Linde and BASF, two industrial gas
and chemicals manufacturers, and Maersk
Group, a shipping ﬁrm, rattle oﬀ lists of
OBOR projects. Deutsche Bank has struc-
tured eight trade deals around it and has an
agreement with the China Development
Bank, one of China’s policy lenders, to
fund several OBOR schemes.
All the activity has confounded early
sceptics. They noted that in the past 15
years as China industrialised, the coun-
try’s companies ran construction projects
over an expanse approximately equiva-
lent to the built area of all western Europe
with very little help from foreign ﬁrms. 
Yet OBOR has highlighted that Chinese
groups have little experience abroad, and
that their Western counterparts oﬀer a
technological edge and thorough knowl-
edge of local conditions across the OBOR
region, from Tajikistan to Thailand. Part-
nering with Western multinationals also
gives Chinese companies credibility, par-
ticularly with ﬁnancial institutions. One
Western executive admits that Chinese
companies make liberal use of his ﬁrm’s
name in OBOR project presentations to
raise ﬁnance even though it is only margin-
ally involved.

Below the belt
Some executives worry that OBOR may
have its downsides in the longer term. Chi-
na wants to open up new markets for Chi-
nese ﬁrms in sectors that are currently
dominated by Western companies, across
industries ranging from engineering and
telecoms to shipping and e-commerce.
Western ﬁrms are proﬁting handsomely
from OBOR itself, but Chinese ones even
more so. A database of open-source infor-

The Economist August 5th 2017 

Schumpeter

King Kong

Business 51

Hong Kong, the global capital of hustle, has a rare moment of self doubt

trusted by foreigners. The banks are assumed to fudge their ﬁg-
ures. Property rights are ﬂuid, as evidenced by crackdowns on ty-
coons in the past three years. Deng Xiaoping said that some peo-
ple should be allowed to get rich ﬁrst. In mainland China under
Mr Xi, to be rich is perilous. The result is that few multinationals
would domicile a big holding company on the mainland under
its opaque laws and tax code. Wall Street’s ﬁve biggest banks have
cut their total credit exposure to the mainland by 20% since 2014.
China wants the yuan to be a more important currency, but its
“three steps forwards, two steps back” approach to lifting capital
controls gets in the way. The pool of yuan deposits held oﬀshore
has fallen by 47% since 2014. All this will hold back Shanghai. 
China’s trade and corporate footprint is growing but with re-
gard to ﬁnance and law, “it is no longer interested or able to
change itself to ﬁt the world”, says a ﬁnance ﬁrm’s chief. That is
why Hong Kong’s role as an adaptor is so important, and one that
China appears to accept. Take “stock connect”, a newish link be-
tween the Shanghai and Hong Kong exchanges. Instead of a riot
of free trading by individuals, buy and sell orders are aggregated
by the authorities on both sides of the border, and settled bilater-
ally once a day. China can keep tabs on mainland investors and it
requires them to repatriate the proceeds of share sales, in yuan.
The authorities in Hong Kong want more multinational ﬁrms
to list in the city, enabling mainland citizens to invest in them,
with China’s approval. To attract them, Hong Kong intends to al-
ter its rules to allow ﬁrms with dual-share classes (such as Alpha-
bet and Facebook) to list. The change should also attract startups.
What about the second worry, that Hong Kong is no longer a
pan-Asian hub? It is true that ﬁrms in India and South-East Asia
look to its long-standing rival, Singapore. It does not help that
Mandarin is challenging English as the language of business in
Hong Kong. And China’s “One Belt, One Road” (OBOR) policy to
strengthen its regional links is being led by state banks with their
headquarters in Beijing, not by Hong Kong institutions (see page
49). Yet Hong Kong has good regional links. Two of the three big-
gest global banks in Asia—Citigroup and HSBC—run operations
from the city. It is through its arm in Hong Kong that China’s most
global bank, Bank of China, is expanding in South-East Asia. 
The city has become a pan-Asian life-insurance hub in the past
decade, hosting the two large regional competitors, AIA and Pru-
dential as well as FWD, an upstart worth several billion dollars.
One of Indonesia’s largest foreign investors, Jardine Matheson,
has its headquarters in Hong Kong. As for the OBOR project, priv-
ate ﬁrms doing business will need contracts and ﬁnancing.

New territories
Hong Kong’s true weakness is technology. Singapore has two uni-
corns—unlisted ﬁrms worth over $1bn—Sea, a shopping and on-
line-gaming ﬁrm, and Grab, a ride-hailing company. It hosts the
Asian headquarters of several big Silicon Valley ﬁrms. Of China’s
technology giants, only Tencent is listed in Hong Kong. The city
could, however, become the laboratory where Chinese and
Western ﬁnancial innovation meet. Ant Financial, China’s ﬁn-
tech giant, is launching its ﬁrst foreign mobile wallet in Hong
Kong. Citi Asia is leading Citi’s charge to win digital customers.
Perhaps China will ignore its own economic interests and rip
up Hong Kong’s rule of law. Or perhaps the city’s decline will be
more insidious, with its regulators and courts decaying. Still, one
of Hong Kong’s biggest problems is its own lack of conﬁdence. For
a rock that was made rich by refugees, that is unbecoming. 7

OF THE world’s three great commercial centres—New York,
London and Hong Kong—two are on the defensive. London
faces a rupture with the European Union, which wants to seize
the City’s euro-related activities and shift them inside the curren-
cy zone. In Hong Kong the fear is of deeper assimilation by main-
land China, followed by irrelevance. 
Entrepots, after all, can become obsolete. Venice once teemed
with merchants, not tourists. Yet while London’s problem is com-
placency, Hong Kong’s pessimism seems overdone. It remains vi-
tal both to China and to the country’s trading partners—the adap-
tor that converts the mainland’s ﬁnancial and legal voltage into
the one used by the rest of the world.
Today’s gloom partly reﬂects a fear of Chinese autocracy. Dur-
ing Schumpeter’s recent visit, Xi Jinping, China’s president, in
town for the 20th anniversary of the resumption of mainland
rule, warned that, while the constitutional structure of “one
country, two systems” remains intact, Hong Kong must not cross
any political “red lines”. Business folk have three worries: that
Hong Kong will be usurped by Shanghai; that it can no longer
claim to be a pan-Asian hub; and that it is a laggard in technology. 
Hong Kong has serious clout. It hosts the world’s fourth-big-
gest stock exchange and currency market. It is a hub for cross-bor-
der loans. About half of China’s outward direct investment ﬂows
through it. After 2000 the city’s lawyers, bankers and consultants
helped scores of China’s big state-owned ﬁrms list shares there.
Hundreds of private mainland ﬁrms also use Hong Kong to list
and as a springboard for foreign expansion. There have been a
few scandals—regulators have halted trading in 13 private main-
land ﬁrms since 2011—but these make up less than 1% of total mar-
ket capitalisation. The overall quality of supervision is strong.
In 2009 China said that Shanghai would be a global ﬁnancial
centre by 2020 (presumably, displacing Hong Kong). But while its
stockmarket is almost as large as Hong Kong’s, economic liberal-
isation has stalled on the mainland. China’s ﬁnancial and legal
systems are isolated. Foreign banks are all but excluded—they
have underwritten just 8% of mainland securities issued so far
this year. Mainland ﬁnancial ﬁrms have too little muscle outside
China and most have boards that lack international experience.
As well as being cut oﬀ, the mainland’s ﬁnancial system is not

52

Economics br ief Six big ideas

Human capital

The people’s champion

In this ser ies

1 Coase and the ﬁrm

2 Becker and human capital

3 Say's law
4 Pigouvian taxes
5 The natural rate of unemployment

Gary Becker made humans the central focus of economics. The second in our series
on big economic ideas
WHY do families in rich countries have
fewer children? Why do companies
in poor countries often provide meals for
their workers? Why has each new genera-
tion spent more time in school than the
one that came before? Why have earnings
of highly skilled workers risen even as
their numbers have also increased? Why
should universities charge tuition fees? 
This is an incredibly diverse array of
questions. The answers to some might
seem intuitive; others are more perplexing.
For Gary Becker, an American economist
who died in 2014, a common thread ran
through them all: human capital.
Simply put, human capital refers to the
abilities and qualities of people that make
them productive. Knowledge is the most
important of these, but other factors, from
a sense of punctuality to the state of some-
one’s health, also matter. Investment in hu-
man capital thus mainly refers to educa-
tion but it also includes other things—the
inculcation of values by parents, say, or a
healthy diet. Just as investing in physical
capital—whether building a new factory or
upgrading computers—can pay oﬀ for a
company, so investments in human capital
also pay oﬀ for people. The earnings of

well-educated individuals are generally
higher than those of the wider population.
All this might sound obvious. As far
back as Adam Smith in the 18th century,
economists had noted that production de-
pended not just on equipment or land but
also on peoples’ abilities. But before the
1950s, when Becker ﬁrst examined links be-
tween education and 
incomes, 
little
thought was given to how such abilities ﬁt
with economic theory or public policy.
Instead, economists’ general practice
was to treat labour as an undiﬀerentiated
mass of workers, lumping the skilled and
unskilled together. To the extent that topics
such as training were thought about, the

6 Overlapping generations

The Economist August 5th 2017

view was pessimistic. Arthur Pigou, a Brit-
ish economist who is credited with coining
the term “human capital”, believed there
would be an under-supply of trained
workers because companies would not
want to teach skills to employees only to
see them poached by rivals.
After the second world war, when
America’s GI bill helped millions complete
high school and university, education
started to receive more attention from
economists, Becker among them. The son
of parents who had never got beyond the
eighth grade but who ﬁlled his childhood
home with discussions about politics, he
wanted to investigate the structure of soci-
ety. Lectures by Milton Friedman at the
University of Chicago, where Becker com-
pleted his graduate studies in 1955, showed
him the analytical power of economic the-
ory. Doctoral degree in hand, Becker, then
in his mid-20s, was hired by the National
Bureau of Economic Research to work on a
project calculating returns on schooling.
What seemed a simple question led him to
realise that no one had yet ﬂeshed out the
concept of human capital. In subsequent
years he developed it into a full-ﬂedged
theory that could be applied to any num-
ber of questions and, soon enough, to is-
sues previously seen as outside the realm
of economics, from marriage to fertility.
One of Becker’s earliest contributions
was to distinguish between speciﬁc and
general human capital. Speciﬁc capital
arises when workers acquire knowledge
directly tied to their ﬁrms, such as how to
use proprietary software. Companies are
happy to pay for this kind of training be-
cause it is not transferable. By contrast, as
Pigou suggested, ﬁrms are often reluctant
to stump up for general human capital:
teach employees to be good software pro-
grammers and they may well jump ship to
whichever company pays them the most.
But this was just the beginning of his
analysis. Becker observed that people do
acquire general human capital, but they of-
ten do so at their own expense, rather than
that of employers. This is true of university,
when students take on debts to pay for
education before entering the workforce. It
is also true of workers in almost all indus-
tries: interns, trainees and junior employ-
ees share in the cost of getting them up to
speed by being paid less.
Becker made the assumption that peo-
ple would be hard-headed in calculating
how much to invest in their own human
capital. They would compare expected fu-
ture earnings from diﬀerent career choices
and consider the cost of acquiring the edu-
cation to pursue these careers, including
time spent in the classroom. He knew that
reality was far messier, with decisions
plagued by uncertainty and complicated
motivations, but he described his model as
an “economic way of looking at life”. His

1

who complete university, namely that they
are disciplined and more likely to be pro-
ductive workers. In any case, people of
greater abilities are the ones who are most
likely to get higher degrees in the ﬁrst place.
Yet increasingly sophisticated empiri-
cal analyses has revealed that the acquisi-
tion of knowledge is in fact a big part of
what it means to be a student. Becker him-
self highlighted research ﬁndings that one
quarter of the rise in per-person incomes
from 1929 to 1982 in America was because
of increases in schooling. Much of the rest,
he insisted, was a result of harder-to-mea-
sure gains in human capital such as on-the-
job training and better health.
He was also fond of pointing to the suc-
cess of Asian economies such as South Ko-
rea and Taiwan, endowed with few natural
resources other than their populations, as
proof of the value of investing in human
capital—and in particular of building up
education systems. Becker’s original analy-
sis focused on the private beneﬁts to stu-
dents, but economists who followed in his
footsteps expanded their ﬁeld of study to
include the broader social gains from hav-
ing well-educated populations.
The importance of human capital is
now taken for granted. What is more con-
troversial is the question of how to culti-
vate it. For those inclined to support a big-
ger state, one interpretation of Becker’s
analysis is that the government ought to
pour money into education and make it
widely available at a low cost. For a conser-
vative, the conclusion might be that the
private gains from education are so big that
students should bear the costs of tuition.
Although Becker’s academic writings
rarely strayed into policy prescriptions, his
popular writings—a monthly Business-
week column that began in the 1980s and
blog posts in later years—oﬀer a measure of
his views. For starters, he talked of “bad in-
equality” but also “good inequality”, an
unfashionable idea today. Higher earnings
for scientists, doctors and computer pro-

The Economist August 5th 2017 

2 simpliﬁed assumptions about people be-
ing purposeful and rational in their deci-
sions laid the groundwork for an elegant
theory of human capital, which he ex-
pounded in several seminal articles and a
book in the early 1960s.
His theory helped explain why youn-
ger generations spent more time in school-
ing than older ones: longer life expectan-
cies raised the proﬁtability of acquiring
knowledge. It also helped explain the
spread of education: advances in technol-
ogy made it more proﬁtable to have skills,
which in turn raised the demand for edu-
cation. It showed that under-investment in
human capital was a constant risk: young
people can be short-sighted given the long
payback period for education; and lenders
are wary of supporting them because of
their lack of collateral (attributes such as
knowledge always stay with the borrower,
whereas a borrower’s physical assets can
be seized). It suggested that there was no
ﬁxed number of good jobs but that highly
paid work would increase as economies
produced more skilled graduates who gen-
erated more innovation.

The becklash
Human capital could also be applied to
topics beyond returns to individuals from
education. The idea was a powerful vari-
able in explaining why some countries
fared far better than others: to promote in-
come growth over many years, heavy in-
vestment in schooling was necessary. It
shed light on why ﬁrms in poor countries
tended to be more paternalistic, providing
dormitories and canteens: they reaped im-
mediate productivity gains from rested,
well-fed workers. It informed big increases
in the numbers of women studying law, ﬁ-
nance and science since the 1950s: the
automation of much household work
meant that women could invest more in
building their careers. And it helped ex-
plain the shrinkage of families in wealthy
countries: if increasing value is placed on
human capital, parents must invest more
in each child, making large families costly.
But any theory that attempts to explain
so much is bound to encounter pushback.
Many critics bristled at Becker’s market-
driven logic, which seemed to reduce peo-
ple to cold, calculating machines. Al-
though “human capital” is an unsightly
term—in 2004 a panel of German linguists
deemed Humankapital the most oﬀensive
word of the year—it is the task of social sci-
ence to identify and reﬁne concepts that
would otherwise be fuzzy. It took Becker’s
framework to make the importance of edu-
cation explicit, and to put people at the
heart of economics.
Within the discipline, some objected
that Becker had overstated the importance
of learning. Education matters not because
it imparts knowledge, critics said, but be-
cause of what it signals about the people

Economics br ief 53

grammers help motivate students to tackle
these diﬃcult subjects, in the process push-
ing knowledge forward; from this perspec-
tive, inequality contributes to human capi-
tal. But when inequality gets too extreme,
the schooling and even the health of chil-
dren from poor families suﬀer, with their
parents unable adequately to provide for
them. Inequality of this sort depresses hu-
man capital, leaving society worse oﬀ.
As for the debate about whether gov-
ernment-funded universities should raise
tuition fees, Becker thought that only fair,
given that their graduates could expect
higher lifetime earnings. Rather than subsi-
dising students who go on to become
bankers or lawyers, he argued that
it
would be more productive for the govern-
ment to fund research and development.
Yet, concerned by mounting inequality in
America, he thought that more should be
done to invest in early childhood educa-
tion and improve the state of schools.

The knowledge economy
Becker applied his own prodigious re-
serves of human capital well beyond edu-
cation. He used his “economic approach”
to look at everything from the motives of
criminals and drug addicts to the evolution
of family structures and discrimination
against minorities. In 1992 he was awarded
the Nobel prize for extending economic
analysis to new spheres of human behav-
iour. He remains one of the most cited
economists of the past half-century.
Mr Becker’s way of doing economics,
initially a radical challenge to convention,
came under attack as it went mainstream.
The rise of behavioural economics, with
its emphasis on limits to rationality, under-
cut his depiction of people as rational
agents seeking to maximise welfare. Im-
provements in data collection and analysis
also gave rise to more detailed empirical re-
search, instead of the wide-ranging con-
cepts that he favoured.
Yet precisely because Mr Becker’s anal-
ysis touched on so much, it still has a lot to
oﬀer. Consider the debate on how govern-
ments ought to respond to disruptive tech-
nological change. From the standpoint of
human capital, one answer is obvious.
Technological advances mean that
the
knowledge that people acquire in school is
becoming obsolete more quickly than be-
fore. At the same time, longer life expectan-
cies mean that the returns on mid-career
training are higher than in the past. It is
therefore both necessary and possible to
replenish human capital by designing bet-
ter systems for lifelong learning.
This is just one element of the response
to technological disruption but it is a vital
one. Becker never intended that his theory
of human capital explain everything in
economics, only that it explain a little
about a lot. On this count his work remains
indispensable. 7

54

Finance and economics

Phoenix economies

When the news gets better

How badly run economies are transformed into investment darlings
NAWAZ SHARIF is the ex-prime minis-
which lie beyond even emerging markets
ter of Pakistan again. His third stint in
at the riskiest edge of the investment uni-
the job ended on July 28th after the Su-
verse. Not all such markets will follow the
preme Court disqualiﬁed him from oﬃce.
path taken by Pakistan. A more apt descrip-
Yet he could justiﬁably claim that he left
tion for one that has come back from the
Pakistan’s economy in a better state than
near-dead to a tolerable life might be
he found it. When Pakistan last went to the
“phoenix economy”. 
polls, GDP had been growing at around 3%,
Which places ﬁt the bill? The spectrum
a dismal rate for a poor country with a bur-
runs from disaster zones, such as Zimba-
geoning population. Inﬂation was above
bwe (or even Venezuela), which might one
10%. The budget deﬁcit had ballooned. A
day bounce back; through early-stage re-
crisis loomed. Four years on, inﬂation is in
covery stories that may yet falter, such as
the low single digits. The budget deﬁcit has
Argentina, Egypt and perhaps Nigeria; to
shrunk to a little above 4% of GDP. The
graduates, such as Pakistan or the Philip-
GDP growth rate is closing in on 6%. Inves-
pines, which has been “ﬂavour of the
tors too have taken notice. Since 2012, Paki-
month for about ten years” in the words of
stan’s stockmarket capitalisation has dou-
bled in dollar terms (see chart). 
Pakistan is not Sweden. It remains at the
wrong end of global rankings of security,
corruption and human development. At
the last count, almost 30% of the popula-
tion were living in poverty. Yet a crisis-
prone economy has at least been put on a
steadier footing. In the process, Pakistan
has become something of an investment
darling. It is thus a template for a particular
kind of turnaround, one that reﬂects an up-
grade in macroeconomic policy.
Bounce-back stories of this kind are
quite rare, because the reforms needed are
initially painful. They are typically found
in what are called “frontier markets”,

Pakistan, stockmarket indices, Januar y 1st 2012=100

Taking flight again

MSCI Pakistan, $ terms

Source: Thomson Reuters

Karachi SE 100

300

200

100

500

400

16

17

2012

13

14

15

0

The Economist August 5th 2017

Also in this section
55 Buttonwood: Money for nothing
56 Pr ivate equity
57 LIBOR’s future
57 Bitcoin’s fork in the road
58 Genetic testing and insurance
Free exchange is away

For daily analysis and debate on economics, visit
Economist.com/economics

one frontier investor. Not much unites
such economies beyond a history of bad
management. But there are some common
themes. Politics are usually unstable. The
army lours over Pakistan, Egypt and Nige-
ria, for instance. And phoenixes tend to go
through the same three phases: a crisis, or
“ashes” stage, as trouble comes to a head
and capital ﬂees the country; a “response”
stage, where a politician grasps the reform
nettle, often with IMF support; and a third
“rebirth” stage, as capital is lured back by
the prospect of economic recovery.
Start with the ashes. Circumstances
will diﬀer from country to country but the
general pattern is quite similar. The econ-
omy hits a ﬁnancial constraint: sometimes
it is the budget deﬁcit; more often the trade
deﬁcit. Investors become loth to oﬀer ﬁ-
nancing. Interest rates shoot up. The ﬂow
of foreign capital dries up or—worse—capi-
tal begins to ﬂee. The currency is propped
up by intervention: foreign-exchange re-
serves are run down to sustain the illusion
that it is worth more than it really is. Re-
serves grow thin. Hard currency is ra-

1

Egypt, % increase on a year earlier

Consumer pr ices, food
and non-alcoholic beverages

Consumer pr ices

2015

16

17

50

40

30

20

10

0

The Economist August 5th 2017 

2 tioned, creating shortages of essential im-
ports. The economy falters. 
The triggers for crisis vary. A weak spot
in Pakistan, for instance, was its reliance on
oil imports to fuel much of its electricity
supply. When the price of crude rose above
$100 a barrel in 2013, the cost of the govern-
ment’s fuel subsidies blew out its budget
deﬁcit. In Egypt the constraint was its cur-
rent-account deﬁcit, which widened from
0.8% of GDP in 2014 to 5.6% by 2016. The de-
scent in the oil price hit fees from the Suez
canal and crimped the value of remit-
tances from oil-rich neighbours. Security
fears led to a drop in revenue from tourism.

Finance and economics 55

The second stage of a turnaround sees
the realisation that orthodox exchange-
rate, monetary and ﬁscal policies are re-
quired. This usually means allowing the
currency to fall, cutting the budget deﬁcit
by trimming wasteful subsidies, and using
monetary policy to control inﬂation rather
than to ﬁnance the government. 
It is not enough for senior technocrats to
argue for such changes. The head of gov-
ernment must back the reforms. Andrew
Brudenell, of Ashmore, a fund manager,
says that once an example is set from the
top, the eﬀect trickles down to other insti-
tutions. A big plus is a high-proﬁle champi-

on for policy changes, such as Mauricio
Macri, Argentina’s president, who was
elected on a platform of economic reform.
Often the IMF will be brought in to lend
hard-currency reserves and policy advice.
Egypt began a three-year IMF programme
last November. Pakistan signed up to its
most recent one in September 2013. 
That is often the cue for the rebirth, dur-
ing which capital ﬂight goes into reverse.
Attracting capital back is “somewhere on
the scale between pretty important and
absolutely crucial”, says Paul McNamara,
of GAM, a fund-management ﬁrm. It takes
a while to shrink a big current-account def-

1

Buttonwood

Money for nothing

Comparing national and corporate balance-sheets
THE easiest way to get an economist to
laugh sardonically is to compare a
country’s ﬁnances to those of a family. It is
both simplistic and wrong, they will ar-
gue, for politicians to say that a country
“must live within its means”.
But in a new working paper* from the
National Bureau of Economic Research,
Patrick Bolton and Haizhou Huang make
a diﬀerent comparison; between the ﬁ-
nances of a government and those of a
company. A business can ﬁnance itself in
three ways: through internal funds (its
revenues); 
through borrowing; and
through equity (the issuance of new
shares). In the ﬁrst two cases, it is easy to
see the analogy with a nation state; gov-
ernments can raise money from taxes or
borrow in the form of government bonds.
But the paper’s most striking idea is
that the national equivalent of equity is
ﬁat money. Governments are able to issue
money that can be used to settle debts
and pay taxes—the term “ﬁat” comes from
the Latin for “let it be done”. Equity gives
its holders a claim on the assets and pro-
ﬁts of a company; money gives its holders
(citizens) a claim on the goods and ser-
vices produced by a country.
Inﬂation can be explained with anoth-
er analogy. If a company issues shares to
new investors for less than their true val-
ue, the holding of existing shareholders is
diluted. “Similarly when a nation issues
more money to new holders while add-
ing less real output than the purchasing
power of money, then existing holders of
money are also diluted in proportion to
the transfer of value,” the authors write.
The authors draw a parallel with a
well-known concept
in corporate ﬁ-
nance—the Modigliani-Miller theorem.
Franco Modigliani and Merton Miller pro-
posed that, in the absence of a range of
complex factors like taxes and bankrupt-

cy costs, the value of a company should be
unaﬀected by how it is ﬁnanced. 
To spell this out: the enterprise value of
a company represents the combined value
of its shares and bonds. The bondholders
have ﬁrst claim on its cashﬂows. If the
company suddenly issues a lot of bonds,
its shares will become more risky and will
fall in value, but the overall enterprise val-
ue will be unchanged. 
With the help of some fancy maths, the
authors say that a similar argument can be
applied to national ﬁnances. Assume that
a country wants to invest to improve its
productive capability. It can choose to ﬁ-
nance these investments by borrowing in
foreign currency or issuing ﬁat money. In
an economy without “frictions”, it should
not matter which of these options it
chooses. A version of the Modigliani-
Miller theorem thus applies.
In the real world, of course, there are
bound to be frictions. One of these is a
side-eﬀect of inﬂation. This may not be a
problem in an ideal economy. Consider a
stock split; some companies with high
nominal share prices issue new shares on a
pro-rata basis. So a company with 10m

shares trading at $500 each could issue
another 10m shares; the price should fall
to $250 and the overall value of the com-
pany would be unchanged. No one loses.
If governments issuing new ﬁat mon-
ey could distribute it equally to each citi-
zen, the same arguments would apply. In-
stead, however, governments tend to use
new money to buy ﬁnancial assets, or
goods and services. So the gains are not
evenly distributed. This is the real cost of
ﬁat-money issuance—the 
transfer of
wealth from some citizens to others. 
But borrowing also brings risks. A
country with too high a debt ratio may de-
fault on its foreign-currency obligations.
The result may be a shock: much higher
interest rates or lost access to the credit
markets that may damage the economy.
So when a rational government ﬁnances
investments, it is choosing between the
redistribution risks caused by inﬂation
and the risk of default on foreign debts.
It is an intriguing way of formulating
the debate, particularly in the light of the
extensive use of quantitative easing by
central banks since the ﬁnancial crisis
broke in 2008. This has caused less inﬂa-
tion than many feared, which has led
some economists to argue that there is lit-
tle constraint on the ability of rich-world
governments to ﬁnance their spending,
provided a central bank is willing to issue
ﬁat money at will. But what counts is con-
ﬁdence. Countries can ﬁnd eager takers
for their debts and willing holders of their
money. Until, at some point, they won’t
accept them any more. Predicting when
that point occurs is the tricky task, for
economists and non-economists alike.

..............................................................

* The Capital Structure of Nations, NBER working paper
23612

Economist.com/blogs/buttonwood

56 Finance and economics

2 icit, even with a cheaper currency. Capital
inﬂows are thus needed both to ﬁnance
the residual deﬁcit and to rebuild foreign-
exchange reserves. 
The ﬁrst people to tempt back are those
citizens who shifted money oﬀshore
ahead of the crisis. The lure of high interest
rates (needed to curb inﬂation) and the di-
minished currency risk that follows a big
devaluation will tempt others, too. For in-
stance, foreign investors now hold almost
a quarter of Egypt’s treasury bills, accord-
ing to JPMorgan Chase. Tax amnesties are
another way to tempt money back. Argen-
tina raised $117bn in 2016-17 in that way.
The hope is that within, say, two years
of the crisis, inﬂation has peaked, the econ-
omy is growing at a decent rate and the cur-
rent-account deﬁcit is manageable. That
then provides a platform for more reform
and a period of crisis-free economic
growth. But lots can go wrong. 
A danger is that hardship and social un-
rest derail the reform process. Cuts to sub-
sidies on top of big devaluations in both
Argentina and Egypt have pushed up inﬂa-
tion rates to 22% and 31% respectively. In
Egypt food-price inﬂation is close to 40%
(see chart on previous page). Even so, in
both places the economy is starting to pick

up steam. Optimists hope Nigeria is in the
very early stages of another turnaround,
but there have already been a few false
dawns. Nigeria bounced back impressive-
ly from a slump in the price of oil, its princi-
pal export, in 2009. Its reform champion
was Lamido Sanusi, the central-bank go-
vernor, who won plaudits for taming inﬂa-
tion and cleaning up the banks. The stock-
market boomed. But the reforms dried up.
Mr Sanusi was sacked. By 2016, Nigeria’s
economy was deep in trouble again. 
There are risks even for graduates of the
phoenix-economy school. Once a modi-
cum of stability returns, the impetus for
further reform often fades. Take Pakistan.
Since it reached the end of its IMF pro-
gramme last year, there has been a slacken-
ing of ﬁscal and monetary discipline and a
re-emergence of old problems in its power
companies. The prospects for faster growth
now rest on Chinese investment in a
3,000km (1,875-mile) China-Pakistan Eco-
nomic Corridor, or CPEC. But that also puts
Pakistan in a familiar spot: a reliance on for-
eign capital, which can turn out to be ﬁckle
and expensive. Trouble would take a while
to surface. By then, investors may be talk-
ing about the big turnaround in Zimbabwe
or Venezuela. 7

Pr ivate equity

Secondary education

N EW Y O R K

vestors during a fund’s “normal” lifetime.
For instance, when many investors want to
sell out of a fund early, a manager may so-
licit oﬀers from buyers through a tender
process, often getting investors a better
price, as in a 2015 deal by Palamon Capital
Partners, a British ﬁrm. A variant is a “sta-
pled” deal where a ﬁrm ties a secondary-
market sale to a primary fundraising. In
June, Lexington, a secondary investor,

Financiers used to changing others’ business models tinker with their own
THE private-equity business presents a
paradox. Its barons like to boast of re-
vamping the companies they buy. But they
themselves have been steadfast to their
own business model, centred on funds
with a ten-year life. Within this time span,
fund managers, known as “general part-
ners” (GPs), commit to buy, manage and
sell a clutch of companies; investors com-
mit to lock up their money for the duration.
Sometimes GPs or investors chafe at the
time constraint. A new segment of the sec-
ondary market, “GP-led” deals, has sprung
up to help them. 
Investors wanting to exit a fund early
need to ﬁnd a buyer for their stake in the
secondary market. But sometimes none
will oﬀer an attractive price. Sometimes
also, a fund nearing its expiry date may
ﬁnd itself still holding a large number of its
investments. GP-led deals place the onus
on fund managers to ﬁnd buyers.
Such transactions have quickly grown
from just 10% of the secondary market in
2012 to over one-third this year, according
to estimates from Credit Suisse, a bank (see
chart). Some such deals oﬀer liquidity to in-

Transaction volume in pr ivate-equity funds, $bn
General Par tner-led transactions

GPs’ formula two

40

30

20

10

0

Source: Credit Suisse

*Forecast

2012

13

14

15

16

17*

The Economist August 5th 2017

bought out €1.2bn ($1.4bn) from investors
in a 2012 fund of BC Partners, a London-
based ﬁrm, while committing €600m to
that ﬁrm’s newest fund. 
Perhaps the greatest novelty of GP-led
deals, however, has been to ease the ten-
year straitjacket. Private-equity managers
often reckon they could make a better re-
turn by holding some assets for longer. But
investors usually want their money back
as promised, and are reluctant to stick
around for much more than an additional
year or two. GP-led fund restructurings
and spin-outs try to close this gap.
The restructuring market had a rocky
start in around 2011. Some of the earliest
deals involved poorly performing manag-
ers with no plans to set up any new funds.
Investors were understandably unhappy
at being stuck in “zombie funds”, or even
being asked to chip in more. 
But as the market has grown, restructur-
ing and spin-out deals have become a way
to provide investors with the liquidity they
want, while allowing assets to be managed
for longer. The deals now nearly always in-
volve new capital, usually from specialist
investors in the private-equity secondary
market, such as HarbourVest or Neuberger
Berman. So existing investors can be of-
fered choices ranging from cashing out to
staying put to investing more.
Such deals are not necessarily just for
strugglers, but have become a tool for fund
managers to pursue other goals. For in-
stance, Investindustrial, a ﬁrm focused on
southern Europe, in March 2017 put some
assets into a new fund, largely because it
expected better returns from managing its
prize asset, PortAventura, a Spanish theme
park, for longer. In 2016, Bridgepoint, a Brit-
ish private-equity ﬁrm, sold several small-
er ﬁrms from its 2005 fund to a new fund,
as it wanted to focus its eﬀorts on a few in-
vestments, such as its crown jewel, Pret A
Manger, a sandwich chain, which it
wished to take public.
The recent boom has been in part cycli-
cal. In private equity’s core markets of Eu-
rope and America, where investors expect
continued growth, secondary stakes are
selling on average at just a 5% discount to
their net asset value, making restructurings
look attractive. In South America, by con-
trast, where the economic outlook is cloud-
ier, the going discount is about 30%, and ne-
gotiations
over
several 
GP-led
restructurings have collapsed. 
David Atterbury of HarbourVest, how-
ever, argues that GP-led deals are far from a
temporary phenomenon: investors prize
the liquidity they bring, and managers ap-
preciate the newfound ﬂexibility. Credit
Suisse reckons private-equity secondary
transactions may approach $40bn this
year. But according to Preqin, a data pro-
vider, private-equity assets stood at nearly
$2.6trn worldwide at the end of 2016. The
new market has plenty of room to grow. 7

The Economist August 5th 2017 

Interest rates

LIBOR pains

Regulators are nudging ﬁnancial
markets towards new benchmark rates
EVERY working day, shortly before noon,
British time, the London Interbank Of-
fered Rate, or LIBOR, is published. For ﬁve
currencies and seven maturities, from
overnight to 12 months, it is the average,
trimmed of outliers, of up to 20 banks’ esti-
mates of the interest rate at which they can
borrow from other banks. It is also the
benchmark for ﬁnancial contracts reck-
oned to be worth $350trn. Derivatives de-
pend on it most. But plenty of asset-man-
agement products, as well as corporate
loans and mortgages, are based on LIBOR
and similar rates, notably EURIBOR, an in-
terbank rate for euros.
Yet LIBOR’s days may be numbered.
Regulators are promoting other bench-
marks. On July 27th Andrew Bailey, the
head of Britain’s Financial Conduct Au-
thority, said that the FCA had spoken to

Bitcoin’s civil war

Knives and forks

banks about sustaining LIBOR until the
end of 2021, but no longer. In April a work-
ing group set up by the Bank of England
concluded that SONIA (the Sterling Over-
night Interbank Average Rate), which the
central bank administers, was its preferred
alternative. In June a committee convened
by the Federal Reserve proposed a broad
Treasury repurchase or repo rate, to be pub-
lished by the New York Fed, as a replace-
ment for dollar LIBOR. Rival rates are also
being pushed in Japan and Switzerland.
Outside the ﬁnancial world, LIBOR is
best known for scandal: in 2012 it emerged
that banks had been manipulating their re-
ported borrowing costs for years. In 2015
and 2016 ﬁve traders were jailed for con-
spiracy. Until 2013, when the FCA started
overseeing the market, LIBOR was not
even regulated. In 2014 ICE Benchmark Ad-
ministration (IBA), a subsidiary of Inter-
continental Exchange (which owns the
New York Stock Exchange, among other
marketplaces), took over the running of
LIBOR from the BBA, a British bankers’
trade body. IBA’s boss, Finbarr Hutcheson,
says that surveillance, using clever soft-
ware, has been stepped up. Banks and reg-
ulators have also sharpened their act. 
But regulators’ enthusiasm for alterna-

The ﬁrst split of the digital currency may not be the last
COMPARED with Brexit, Bitexit seems
a piece of cake. On August 1st, with-
out much agonising or awkward negotia-
tions, a group of Bitcoin activists and
entrepreneurs managed to create a sec-
ond version of the crypto-currency. It
immediately gained a following: as The
Economist went to press, a unit of “Bitcoin
Cash” had a price of $460 and tokens
worth $7.6bn were in circulation (al-
though that is still much smaller than
Bitcoin classic, which stood at about
$2,700 and nearly $45bn).
This “fork”, as such events are called,
came earlier than expected. But it is how
insiders had expected a two-year-old
conﬂict over the future of Bitcoin to end.
At the heart of this “civil war” was the
question of how to increase the capacity
of the system, which can handle only up
to seven transactions per second. The
new version is able to process more than
50 per second, but otherwise works
much like the original one.
Will Bitcoin Cash be more than just
another “altcoin”, as the many existing
clones of the crypto-currency are called?
It is backed by Chinese “miners”, ﬁrms
that provide the computing power to
conﬁrm payments and mint new digital

coins. They have been unhappy with
how the original system has been man-
aged by its developers—and made some
further technical tweaks to ensure that
the new Bitcoin survives. The followers
of the two versions will now ﬁght over
which can claim to be the “real” Bitcoin.
More interesting is what the fork
might mean for the broader ecosystem of
crypto-currencies, of which there are
now hundreds. It has long been assumed
that crypto-land would be dominated by
one currency, Bitcoin, because of net-
work eﬀects: the more existing users it
has, the more attractive it becomes to
new ones. But Emin Gun Sirer of Cornell
University says the split shows that this
need not be true. Provided a group of
crypto-cognoscenti has the will, the skills
and oodles of computing power, it can
conjure a new digital currency into exis-
tence—and, perhaps, even create value. 
This week’s fork has made Bitcoin
holders richer: they get an amount of the
new version equal to their holdings of
the old sort; and at least for now, both
together are worth more than the old one
alone. For this reason alone, expect an-
other split in November when the old
Bitcoin system may get an upgrade.

Finance and economics 57

tives is founded on technical rather than
moral concerns. LIBOR’s underlying mar-
kets have worn thin. Although the shortest
dollar, sterling and euro rates are based
largely on actual loans, others rely on
banks’ “expert judgment”—ie, informed
guesses. In one currency-term combina-
tion, Mr Bailey noted, banks on the LIBOR
panel mustered just 15 transactions in all of
2016. Another worry is that LIBOR implicit-
ly includes banks’ own credit risk. Some-
thing closer to a risk-free rate would be a
better benchmark for some markets, espe-
cially in derivatives.
Hence the push for alternatives based,
like SONIA and the American broad repo
rate, on transactions. (Eﬀorts to rebase
EURIBOR on transactions have stumbled.)
Such benchmarks should also be hard to
manipulate—and thus immune to the rig-
ging that befell LIBOR.
The alternatives also have their ﬂaws.
Joshua Roberts of JCRA, a ﬁnancial-risk
consultancy, agrees that LIBOR is likely to
be replaced by transaction-based rates. But
he points out that SONIA, for example, be-
ing an overnight rate ﬁxed daily, does not
reﬂect the dependence of rates on the term
of a loan. A borrower pegged to three-
month LIBOR knows his interest payments
for the next quarter. With SONIA, he won’t.
Even if LIBOR survives for several more
years, some contracts based on it will out-
live the benchmark. For that reason, says
the International Swaps and Derivatives
Association, a trade body, substitutes (pos-
sibly the new benchmarks) will have to be
written in. It may anyway be too soon to
write oﬀ LIBOR. Mr Hutcheson at IBA wel-
comes the competition, but argues that
LIBOR will continue to suit multinational
corporate borrowers, among others. “I feel
very conﬁdent”, he says, “that LIBOR will
be here for a long, long time to come.” Let’s
see in four years. 7

58 Finance and economics

DNA and insurance

The gene is out of the bottle

Insurers worry that genetic tests might one day ruin their business
IF A genetic test could tell whether you are
at increased risk of getting cancer or Alz-
heimer’s, would you take it? As such tests
become more accessible, more and more
people are saying “yes”. The insurance in-
dustry faces a few headaches as a result.
Once used only for medical reasons, ba-
sic predictive genetic tests can now be or-
dered online for a few hundred dollars.
One company, 23andMe, in California, has
collected some 4,000 litres of sputum
since 2007, enlightening 2m people on
their ancestry, health risks and what they
may pass on to oﬀspring. In April it re-
ceived regulatory approval to screen for
risk factors connected to ten diseases and
genetic conditions, including late-onset
Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s. The ruling
could open the ﬂoodgates for others to sell
direct to consumers.
“Information is power”, argue many
who take such tests. But insurers fear that
without equal access to such information,
they will lose out to savvy customers. Con-
sumer groups, on the other hand, fear that
if underwriters did have access to such in-
formation, people with “bad” genes might
ﬁnd themselves unfairly excluded from
cover. Either way, the scientiﬁc advances
could well disrupt insurance signiﬁcantly.
Unlike diagnostic genetic tests, predic-
tive ones are conducted on people without
symptoms. The best-known example was
provided by Angelina Jolie, an actress who
discovered she had a gene mutation that
markedly raised her risk of breast cancer.

She underwent a double mastectomy.
Tests might inﬂuence ﬁnancial as well
as medical decisions. A person at
in-
creased risk of dying young may want to
buy life insurance. Someone likely to con-
tract cancer may buy cancer or critical-ill-
ness cover, which pays a lump sum upon
diagnosis. Because predictive tests—unlike
diagnostic ones—often need not be dis-
closed, the customer can secure an advan-
tage over a future insurer.
So underwriters warn that predictive
genetic testing could well lead to adverse
selection. The New York Times recently re-
ported on a woman who bought long-
term care insurance after testing positive
for ApoE4, a mutation of a gene related to
increased risk of Alzheimer’s. The insurer
had tested her memory three times before
issuing the policy, but could not know
about the genetic result. Robert Green, at
Harvard University, found that people told
they have the mutation were ﬁve times
more likely to buy long-term care insur-
ance than those without such information. 
Asymmetry of information—when the
customer knows more than the insurer—is
the industry’s nightmare. If predictive tests
further improve and become more com-
mon while non-disclosure rules stay in
place, some insurance products might
eventually die out. Either insurers would
go belly-up, or premiums would become
prohibitively expensive. Hence, argue
some insurers, if the customer knows
something relevant about their health, so

The knowledge premium

The Economist August 5th 2017

should the insurer.
But tests might also help insurers. Chris-
toph Nabholz, from Swiss Re, a reinsurance
giant, is most excited about tests that spot
early signs of cancer or cardiovascular dis-
ease. For life and health insurers, who
want to keep people alive and well, such
information could be invaluable. Discov-
ery, a South African health insurer, plans to
oﬀer customers a test that maps part of
their genome. The focus is on “actionable
data”, where medical intervention or life-
style change could mitigate risk, explains
Jonathan Broomberg from Discovery. 
This might help people who are already
insured. But it worries those seeking new
policies, who fear that underwriters may
use predictive information to discriminate.
Some might lose access to insurance. This
raises ethical questions about when, if
ever, genetic discrimination is acceptable.
Moreover, since the relative role that genes
play in the development of diseases is still
being studied, some people might be un-
fairly and wrongly penalised. 

Unpredictability rules
So regulations today often protect consum-
ers from the mandatory disclosure of pre-
dictive tests. But the rules are patchy. In
Britain the industry has agreed to a blanket
moratorium, renewable every three years,
on using predictive genetic information.
The sole exception is Huntington’s chorea,
where a test of one gene is infallible and
has to be disclosed to an insurer for life cov-
er worth more than £500,000 ($662,000).
In America the Genetic Information Non-
discrimination Act bans health insurers
(and employers) from using such results,
but is silent on other types of insurance. In
several countries life insurers may already
ask for disclosure of predictive genetic tests
for policies over a certain value.
But testing is rarely cut-and-dried. Ron-
nie Klein from the Geneva Association, an
insurance-industry think-tank, says that,
unlike Huntington’s, most illnesses stem
from a number of factors, including life-
style and environment, and a combination
of genes. For example, although the ApoE4
allele increases the risk of Alzheimer’s,
many without it still get the disease.
Some regulators, such as Germany’s,
have outlawed direct-to-consumer tests.
But nothing stops Germans from ordering
from abroad, and, just as it became normal
for life insurers to ask for family history, so
insurers will surely eventually have access
to relevant genetic information. The ques-
tion will be what they are allowed to do
with it. When blood tests for AIDS ﬁrst ap-
peared, insurers also fretted about adverse
selection. Many jurisdictions ruled they
could not be used for calculating health
premiums, as these were a basic good, but
could be used for life policies. As genetic
testing spreads, society and insurers may
face many similar diﬃcult assessments. 7

Science and technology

The Economist August 5th 2017 59

Also in this section
60 Better holograms
61 A wild idea to pay for conser vation

Genetic engineer ing

DNA and how to adjust it

Researchers are getting better at tweaking the genomes of human embryos
IT IS risky to predict who and what will
Oregon Health & Science University and
win a Nobel prize. But some discoveries
her colleagues, obtained sperm donated
are so big that their receipt of science’s glitz-
by a man who carries a mutated version of
iest gong seems only a matter of time. One
a gene called MYBPC3 that causes hypertro-
such is CRISPR-Cas9, a powerful gene-edit-
phic cardiomyopathy (HCM), a condition
ing technique that is making the fraught
in which the walls of the heart grow too
and ﬁddly business of altering the genetic
thick. As with the genes that cause thalas-
material of living organisms much easier. 
saemia and favism, inheriting even a single
Biologists have taken to CRISPR-Cas9
copy of the malformed version of this gene
is enough to cause HCM.
with gusto, ﬁrst with animal experiments
and now with tests on humans. In March
These sperm, half of which would have
researchers in China made history when
been carrying the mutated version of
they reported its ﬁrst successful applica-
MYBPC3, were then used to fertilise eggs
tion to a disease-causing genetic mutation
containing a normal copy of the gene. The
in human embryos. But their results were
resulting embryos thus had a 50:50 chance
mixed. Although they achieved 100% suc-
of containing a defective copy. In the ab-
cess in correcting the faulty gene behind a
sence of editing, and had they been al-
type of anaemia called favism, they tested
lowed to develop, those with a faulty ver-
the technique in only two aﬀected embry-
sion would have grown into adults likely
os. Of four others, carrying a mutation that
to suﬀer from the disease.
causes thalassaemia, another anaemia,
only one was successfully edited.
Now, in a study just published in Na-
ture, a group of researchers from America,
China and South Korea have pulled oﬀ a
similar trick, with striking consistency,
among many more embryos, while avoid-
ing or minimising several of the pitfalls of
previous experiments. Their work suggests
that, with a bit of tweaking and plenty of
elbow grease, CRISPR-Cas9 stands a good
chance of graduating, sooner or later, from
the laboratory to the clinic.
The researchers involved, Hong Ma of

Swords to ploughshares
CRISPR-Cas9 editing has been developed
from a bacterial defence system that
shreds the DNA of invading viruses.
CRISPR stands for “clustered regularly in-
terspaced short palindromic repeats”.
These are short strings of RNA, a molecule
similar to DNA, each designed to ﬁx onto a
particular segment of a virus’s DNA. Cas9
is an enzyme which, guided by CRISPRs,
cuts the DNA at the speciﬁed point. 
Modifying this arrangement for the
purposes of genetic engineering is simple,

For daily analysis and debate on science and
technology, visit
Economist.com/science

at least in theory. Since DNA and RNA work
in essentially the same ways in all living or-
ganisms, designing appropriately custo-
mised CRISPR guide molecules can induce
Cas9 to cut any cell’s DNA wherever the de-
signers choose, eliminating undesirable se-
quences of genetic “letters”. Since cells will
then try to repair this sort of damage, ge-
netic engineers can, by providing corrected
versions of the DNA that has been deleted
for use as templates which a cell can copy,
encourage the repair mechanism to ﬁx the
problem in the way they had intended. 
The hope was that, by being given such
templates, embryos could be purged of na-
scent genetic disease. That hope appeared
fulﬁlled, at least in part. By the end of the
experiment, 72% of the embryos were free
of mutant versions of MYBPC3, an improve-
ment on the 50% that would have escaped
HCM had no editing taken place.
In achieving this, Dr Ma and her col-
leagues overcame two problems often en-
countered by practitioners of CRISPR-Cas9
editing. One is that the guidance system
may go awry, with the CRISPR molecules
leading the enzyme to parts of the genome
that are similar, but not quite identical, to
the intended target. Happily, they found no
evidence of such oﬀ-target editing.
A second problem is that, even if the ed-
its happen in the right places, they might
not reach every cell. Many previous experi-
ments, including some on embryos, have
led to mosaicism, a condition in which the
result of the editing process is an individ-
ual composed of a mixture of modiﬁed
and unmodiﬁed cells. If the aim of an edit
is to ﬁx a genetic disease, such mosaicism
risks nullifying the eﬀect. 
Dr Ma and her colleagues conjectured
that inserting the CRISPR-Cas9 molecules
into the egg simultaneously with the
sperm might help. That way the process is

1

60 Science and technology

The Economist August 5th 2017

2 given as much time as possible to complete
its work before the fertilised egg undergoes
its ﬁrst round of cell division. Sure enough,
after three days (by which time the original
fertilised egg had divided several times), all
but one of the 42 embryos in which the
technique had worked showed the same
modiﬁcations in every one of its cells.
So far, so good. But a third problem that
has bedevilled experiments with CRISPR-
Cas9 concerns the quality of the repair.
There are at least two ways for cells to re-
pair DNA damage. One of them simply
stitches the severed strands of DNA back
together, deleting or adding genetic letters
at random as it does so. Because it intro-
duces mutations of its own, this process is
not suitable for correcting DNA defects for
medical purposes (though it might, for in-
stance, be used to modify crops). Fortu-
nately, the other mechanism patches the
break with guidance from a template, and
thus without introducing any additional
mistakes. But cells seem to prefer the slap-
dash approach. In previous CRISPR-Cas9
research, the more precise method was in-
volved only 2% to 25% of the time.

Running repairs
The researchers’ cells were, however,
much more diligent. That is, perhaps, to be
expected. Any DNA damage to a fertilised
egg which is not ﬁxed properly will aﬀect
the entire organism, so embryos have an
evolutionary incentive to get things right.
But there was a surprise. Contrary to ex-
pectations, it was rarely the injected tem-
plate that the cells used as a reference for re-
pair. Of the 42 modiﬁed embryos, only one
did so. The rest repaired the faulty gene by
referring to the non-mutated copy they
had inherited from their mothers. That
contrasted with the results of control ex-
periments the researchers carried out in
parallel on human stem cells, in which the
repair template they supplied was used
much more frequently. This, they say, sug-
gests a hitherto-unknown DNA repair
mechanism may be at work in embryos.
If true, that is both good news and bad.
It is good because it suggests embryos will
often perform high-quality repairs with-
out any extra prompting. It is bad because
that repair will only be useful if the second
copy of the gene is itself not harmful. Em-
bryos that inherit two damaged copies of a
gene, one from each parent, would simply
replace one defective copy with another, to
no overall beneﬁt. 
Jin-Soo Kim, of the Institute for Basic
Science, in South Korea, who is another of
the paper’s authors, thinks that, with a bit
more research, genetic engineers may be
able to get around that problem. He points
out that mouse embryos seem to have no
diﬃculty using external genetic templates.
It may be that there are biochemical cues
which control how a cell eﬀects DNA re-
pair, and that these can be manipulated.

On the other hand, the diﬀerence may re-
ﬂect an unbridgeable evolutionary di-
vergence between mice and humans—spe-
cies whose most recent common ancestor
lived more than 60m years ago.
But that is a question for another paper.
Over the coming months Dr Ma and her
colleagues plan to replicate and extend
their work using other mutations and oth-
er donors. One goal is to improve the pro-
cess’s eﬃciency still further. Shoukhrat Mi-

talipov, a colleague of Dr Ma’s in Oregon,
and yet another of the paper’s authors,
thinks the technique’s rate of eﬀectiveness
can be boosted to at least 90%. The eventu-
al objective, still a long way oﬀ, is full-
blown clinical trials, in which modiﬁed
embryos, purged of disease-causing genes,
are reimplanted into their mothers and
carried to term. If and when this is done
successfully, human genetic engineering
will truly have come of age. 7

Holograms

Winging the blues

A new way to solve an image problem
HOLOGRAPHY is a useful technology,
but somehow faintly disappointing.
The fantasy is of a “Star Trek” style holo-
deck, or even the less ambitious idea of
three-dimensional television pictures. The
reality, for the man or woman in the street,
is smudgy images that act as security fea-
tures on credit cards, passports and an in-
creasing number of banknotes. 
Holography does have many uses be-
yond this. These include projecting 3D art
displays in museums, enabling measure-
ments to be made with great precision us-
ing a technique called holographic interfer-
ometry, and accurately assessing the three
dimensions of packages for shipping com-
panies. But the diﬀerence between the
high-quality holograms required for those
applications and the quotidian credit-card
variety is that a laser and special equip-
ment are needed to project them. Indeed, if
the hologram is in colour, three lasers are

needed, one for each primary: red, green
and blue. The result is not always persua-
sive. Getting the primary holograms to
overlap perfectly is hard. And to see the
picture usually requires a darkened room.
All this led Rajesh Menon, an engineer
at the University of Utah, to start eyeing up
butterﬂies—notably the bright blue mor-
phos found in Central and South America.
The striking colour of a morpho’s wings
(see picture) is the product not of pigment,
but of the structure and arrangement of
the scales on those wings. These scales re-
fract light, splitting it into its component
wavelengths, and also diﬀract it, causing
those various wavelengths to interfere
with one another. As a result, blue wave-
lengths are intensiﬁed and reﬂected back
to the onlooker while those of other col-
ours either cancel each other out or are
scattered, and thus minimised. Moreover,
unlike today’s holograms, the colour and 

1

2

The Economist August 5th 2017 

appearance of a morpho’s wings remain
the same, regardless of the angle they are
viewed from. 
Dr Menon and his team thought mim-
icking the way morphos refract and diﬀract
light might thus let them create more realis-
tic and usable holograms than today’s. In a
paper just published in Scientiﬁc Reports,
they describe how they have done this.
A conventional hologram is made by
splitting a laser beam in two, scanning one
of the half beams over the object to be ho-
lographed, recombining the half beams
and then capturing an image created by
the recombined beams on a photographic
ﬁlm. The result is an interference pattern
imprinted on the ﬁlm by the interaction be-
tween the out-of-kilter half beams. Shine
light (ideally of the same frequency as the
original laser) on this pattern and the pro-
cess is, in essence, reversed. That produces
a 3D representation of the original object.
Dr Menon’s approach diﬀers from this
established method in several ways. First,
it dispenses with the laser. Second, the ﬁlm
on which the hologram is captured is not a
smooth one but, rather, a sheet of transpar-
ent plastic with microscopic bumps and
grooves in it. Third, the pattern of those
bumps and grooves is created not photo-
graphically but as the product of calcula-
tions by a computer.
Instead of the laser, Dr Menon starts
with multiple images, taken from diﬀerent
directions, of the object to be holographed.
These can come either from a special, ste-
reoscopic camera or, more prosaically,
from a single camera moved around to dif-
ferent vantage points.
These images are then fed into a com-
puter. Here, a special algorithm calculates
how to shape the topography of the plastic
sheet so that it will manipulate the light
eventually used to illuminate that sheet in
a way which creates the desired 3D image.
In essence, the sheet’s bumps and grooves
act like the scales of a morpho’s wings, re-
fracting and diﬀracting the incident light to
produce the desired eﬀect.
Once the computer has calculated the
topography needed to do this, that topog-
raphy (or, rather, its inverse) is inscribed
onto a master version using photolithogra-
phy—a technique also employed to make
computer chips. This master may then be
used to stamp multiple copies of the holo-
gram, in a similar fashion to that employed
to make vinyl records.
Crucially, 
the 
result—having been
created using ordinary light rather than
special laser beams—does not require la-
sers to recreate the image. A beam of white
light will do the trick. Even a torch will
work. Using one, Dr Menon can generate
holograms with a full spectrum of colours
and with a richness which he estimates is
up to ten times that of today’s most sophis-
ticated holograms. The new holograms
may also be viewed from all angles with-

Paying for conser vation

A wild idea

Science and technology 61

three researchers observe that the English
Premier League, the richest in soccer, has
a crowned lion as its logo. They suggest
that if the league chipped in, say, £1 ($1.30),
for each of the 5m T-shirts sold every year
bearing this logo, that would buy a lot of
local recruits to lion-protection schemes
in places where lions are under threat. It
would also, they imagine, buy a lot of
good publicity for the league itself.
If the league were amenable, this idea
might well work. But caution is advisable
when choosing collaborators for such
ventures. Conservationists thought they
were onto a good thing in 2014 when, at
the behest of local researchers, the mas-
cot chosen for the Brazilian World Cup
was a three-banded armadillo. At the
outset, the proposal was that FIFA, the
world governing body of football, and
the Brazilian government would jointly
pay for the protection of 1,000 hectares of
armadillo habitat for every goal scored in
the competition. The merchandising of
the mascot, dubbed Fuleco, a portman-
teau of “Futebol” and “Ecologia”, raised
millions of dollars. The conservationists
are still, however, waiting for the prom-
ised forest to be set aside. Both FIFA and
the government, beset by other woes,
seem to have forgotten about the idea.

Might those who proﬁt from images of wildlife be induced to help save it?
MEERKATS are endearing creatures.
Indeed, they are so endearing that
they have been turned into characters in
a long-running series of advertisements
on British television for a price-compari-
son website. But nothing comes from
nothing. Thirty years ago, few non-zool-
ogists would have heard of these social
mongooses and the joke would not have
worked. The animals were brought to
public prominence by a television docu-
mentary, “Meerkats United”, which
described the doings of a group of them
in the Kalahari, where they live. That
documentary relied, in turn, on a re-
search project run by David Macdonald,
a zoologist at Oxford University. In es-
sence, meerkats as a cultural phenome-
non were created by this project.
Had that creation been purely artistic,
it would be protected by copyright. Roy-
alties derived from such copyright might
then have been used for further study
and conservation of the animals in ques-
tion. Sadly for zoologists, the natural
world is not covered by copyright and no
royalties have ensued. But Dr Macdonald
and two colleagues, Caroline Good and
Dawn Burnham, writing in Animals, still
wonder if those who proﬁt by cultural
representations of wildlife might some-
times be induced to contribute a sliver of
their proﬁts to the conservation of the
animals so represented.
Rather than the meerkat, the three
researchers take as their example a spe-
cies with a longer history of public per-
ception, the lion. Another project in
which Dr Macdonald is involved is a
study of lions in Zimbabwe. This was in
the news recently when one of the ani-
mals being followed was shot, legally, by
an American hunter after it had strayed
out of a protected area. Lots of other lions
are killed illegally, though—a phenome-
non that might be reduced if more people
were paid to protect them. 
Going for the throat, as it were, the

*Of clubs in the ten wealthiest spor ts leagues worldwide
Source: Good, Burham and Macdonald, Animals

Mammalian mascots*, by endangered status, %

Vulnerable

Endangered

Domestic

Least concern

Near threatened

Cr itically endangered

Status unknown

Rare breeds

2016

0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35

out distortion. And they cost a fraction of
those produced by existing techniques.
For now, Dr Menon and his colleagues
are focusing on the kind of holograms used
as security features, although they have
also created holographic images of 3D ob-
jects in free space. Eventually, they hope to
make holographic movies, using devices
called phase spatial light modulators con-
trolled directly by the output from the ho-
logram-generating algorithm. Such modu-
lators deploy liquid crystals instead of

bumps on a surface to manipulate light.
If that idea can be made to work, then
fantasies such as holographic television
might indeed be brought into being. A
more immediate market, though, is replac-
ing existing security holograms with ones
that are clearer, harder to forge and view-
able from any angle. Perhaps, if Dr Menon
has his way, the portraits of heads of state
and other worthies on banknotes will
soon pop up to greet the user as they are
pulled from his wallet. 7

62

Books and arts

The Economist August 5th 2017

Also in this section
64 Fiona Mozley’s ﬁction
64 How the aﬄuent spend
65 Johnson: Game of tongues

Natural histor y

Crucibles of cosmopolitan creation

Extinctions ain’t what they used to be
IN THE central hall of the Natural History
Museum in London a dinosaur has been
displaced. The skeleton, donated by
Andrew Carnegie, had long dominated the
nave of the imposing gothic pile intended
by its founder Sir Richard Owen as a “ca-
thedral to nature”. “Dippy”, as the Diplodo-
cus was sometimes known, was not mere-
ly spectacular. He provided a dramatic
illustration of one of the great discoveries
of 19th-century science—that most of natu-
ral history is, indeed, history. 
Until the end of the 18th century hardly
anyone believed that the past contained
creatures unknown in the present. By 1841,
when Owen coined the term “dinosaur”,
extinction was an accepted fact. Today it is
clear that the species currently creeping,
crawling, striding, swimming, photosyn-
thesising—and sometimes just dawdling—
across the face of the Earth represent a tiny
fraction of those that evolution has created
and discarded over the aeons.
Unfortunately, the fraction is shrinking
still. Humans have been killing oﬀ species
for tens of thousands of years, and contin-
ue to do so at an alarming rate. Palaeontol-
ogists have identiﬁed ﬁve horrendous
“mass extinctions” in the past 500m years
of the Earth’s history. Humans, it is now
frequently asserted, are causing a “sixth ex-
tinction”—a phrase which, in 2014, became
the title of an excellent book by Elizabeth
Kolbert, a writer at the New Yorker. 
It is in this context of quasi-existential

Inher itors of the Earth: How Nature Is
Thr iving in an Age of Extinction. By

Chr is Thomas. Allen Lane; 320 pages; £20.
To be published in Amer ica in September
by PublicAﬀairs; $28

The Ends of the World: Volcanic
Apocalypses, Lethal Oceans, and Our
Quest to Understand Earth’s Past Mass

Extinctions. By Peter Brannen. Ecco; 336
pages; $27.99. To be published in Br itain
in September by Oneworld; £18.99

dread that the Natural History Museum
has replaced Dippy with an arguably even
more impressive skeleton (pictured). Dur-
ing the age of industrial whaling, oil-ﬁred
ships with explosive harpoons cut through
the blue-whale population as a knife
through blubber. The whales could easily
have gone the way of the dinosaurs. But
half a century ago humans decided to stop
the killing, and today the whales’ numbers
are increasing. The blue-whale skeleton
freshly suspended from the museum’s
vaulted roof commemorates this turna-
round. The whale’s name is Hope. 
This is the attitude that Chris Thomas 
espouses and engenders in his thought-
provoking new book, “Inheritors of the
Earth”. In 2004 Mr Thomas, an ecologist at
the University of York, was one of the au-
thors of a scientiﬁc report suggesting that a
relatively small amount of global warming

For daily analysis and debate on books, ar ts and
culture, visit
Economist.com/culture

could see almost a ﬁfth of the species that
live on land “committed to extinction”.
Though that estimate came in for some
stick, Mr Thomas still reckons he was
broadly correct. But at the same time he be-
lieves that humans are bringing about a
great new age of biological diversity. 
This is most obvious locally. Most peo-
ple who take an interest can tell you of spe-
cies that used to grace their local scene but
no longer do, even though they are still to
be found elsewhere. But despite all these
losses biodiversity is, almost everywhere,
higher than it used to be. New species have
been introduced faster than old ones have
vanished. Even the islands of the Paciﬁc,
where the Polynesian peoples, and the rats
that travelled with them, wiped out 10% of
the world’s birds, may now boast more
species per island than they did before hu-
mans arrived. In most places where there
are good data, Mr Thomas writes, there are
currently between 20% and 100% more
plant species than there used to be. 
This, to most conservationists, comes as
something between cold comfort and in-
sult added to injury. The idea that import-
ed species make up for extirpated ones
feels like biodiversity bean-counting rath-
er than real conservation (nothing, after
all, has been conserved). And invasive in-
troduced species, like those Polynesian
rats, can drive natives extinct. But through
argument and anecdote Mr Thomas
shows that mix-and-match “novel” ecosys-
tems, such as the unprecedentedly cosmo-
politan forests now fringing Lake Maggiore
on the Swiss-Italian border, have copious
charms. He also argues that the threat of
invasive species is overdone. Most intro-
duced plant species, he says, never get 
beyond the farms or gardens they are intro-
duced to; most that establish themselves in
the wild remain thoroughly marginal; and
of the few that thrive only a small minority

1

The Economist August 5th 2017 

2 actually threaten the natives—a fraction of
a fraction of a fraction. Invasives, he 
argues, are a smaller threat than either 
habitat loss or direct exploitation. 
These points have been rehearsed in re-
cent years in such books as “Rambunc-
tious Garden” by Emma Marris and “The
New Wild” by Fred Pearce, as well as by 
academics like Peter Kareiva of the Univer-
sity of California, Los Angeles, and Erle 
Ellis of the University of Maryland. They
have attracted withering scorn from,
among others, E.O. Wilson, a Harvard 
entomologist and the doyen of the belle-
trist arm of the conservation movement,
who ﬁnds their hubristic ideas “as free of
fear as they are of facts”. Where Mr Thom-
as goes further is in arguing that people are
not merely rearranging more even-hand-
edly a shrinking number of species. They
are creating the conditions for the birth of a
great many new ones. 
Some scientists emphasise the scale of
humankind’s redistribution of species by
treating it as an undoing of the mighty
work of plate tectonics. By mixing up the
contents of the diﬀerent continents people
have recreated, in a virtual form, the world
of 200m years ago—a world with but one
sea, Panthalassa, and one vast continent,
Pangaea. 

Topsy-turvy
But, as Mr Thomas points out, the new Pan-
gaea is best seen not as a continuous land
mass, but as an all-encompassing archipel-
ago—a mosaic of ecosystems in intermit-
tent contact with each other. Charles Dar-
win realised, when looking at the ﬁnches
of the Galapagos, that as island popula-
tions go their separate ways, new species
spring up. (This is why the Paciﬁc islands,
which make up only 0.25% of the Earth’s
dry land, were able to sport 10% of its bird
species before the great day of the rat.) The
world full of new contexts that humans
have provided for old species, Mr Thomas
argues, will see similar diversiﬁcation. 
Some examples: sparrows, which have
spread from their Central Asian point of
origin by adapting to life among people,
are turning into diﬀerent sorts of bird in dif-
ferent sorts of places; ﬂies which until re-
cently dined on the fruit of the American
hawthorn have, since the arrival of Euro-
pean apples, split into spinophilic and 
pomophilic populations—forcing the para-
sitic wasps that prey upon them to do the
same; a pretty ragwort brought to Oxford
from the slopes of Mt Etna has, through a
liking for the gravel beds of railways,
spread from city to city in England, creating
new varieties as it did so. 
All around the world there is similar ev-
idence of hybridisation and incipient spe-
ciation as separated populations go their
diﬀerent ways and get it on with diﬀerent
far-ﬂung relatives. “I ﬁnd it diﬃcult”, Mr
Thomas writes, “to imagine a period in the

entire history of terrestrial life on Earth
when the speed of origination of new evo-
lutionary lineages could have been faster.” 
The idea of new species springing up at
such a pace will seem incredible to readers
taught, by childhood outings to visit dino-
saurs such as Dippy, that evolution takes a
million years or so just to get out of bed, let
alone do anything constructive. But evolu-
tion takes its tempo from the world around
it. When driven by slow geological change,
evolution is slow. Faced with sudden
change, such as that which comes from be-
ing plonked down in novel but not inimi-
cal situations, it ups its game accordingly. 
This creative aspect to the current crisis
calls into question the equation of today’s
depredations with the mass extinctions of
the past. In “The Ends of the Earth” Peter
Bannen, a journalist, provides a fascinat-
ing account of these planetary paroxysms,
in each of which more than half the 

They come and go

species living at the time were wiped out.
Though there are common themes, such as
changes in sea level and upsets in the car-
bon cycle, which resonate with what hu-
mans are doing to the Earth today, no two
of these disasters were quite alike. And
looked at in the round they leave a strong
impression that today’s threat to species is,
as yet, quite unlike those of the past. 
In the “Big Five” mass extinctions
whole chunks of the planet became
deadly to most of their inhabitants as 
severe shifts in sea level, climate and ocean
chemistry (along with, in one case, an 
asteroid impact) caused ecosystems to top-
ple like dominoes. That is not what is hap-
pening now. Despite the fact that humans
have contributed to the extinction of an 
estimated 177 species of large mammals—
almost all of which were done in by Stone
Age hunters—there are still vast numbers
of large mammals wandering around. It is
just that they are mostly pigs and cows.

Books and arts 63

In terms of biodiversity, that is bad. But
it is nothing like the near uninhabitability
that characterised large parts of the planet
during past mass extinctions. Ecosystems
have been disturbed, diced up and in some
cases badly damaged—but few have failed
utterly. Humans are changing the climate,
the carbon and nitrogen cycles and more,
and those changes pose mortal risks to
hundreds of millions of humans and exis-
tential risks to many other species. But
they do not look like the cascading ecosys-
tem collapses seen in mass extinctions. As
Doug Erwin, a palaeontologist, explains to
Mr Bannen, “If it’s actually true that we’re
in a sixth mass extinction, then there’s no
point in conservation”—because if things
were that far gone the whole world would,
in eﬀect, be coming to an end. Again.
The idea that today’s decimation is
qualitatively diﬀerent to the mass extinc-
tions of yore, and that a compensating
mass speciation is already under way,
seems at some level to be quite encourag-
ing. But what does it mean in terms of prac-
tical action? For action is clearly needed;
things are not ﬁne as they are. Many extinc-
tions do not have to add up to a certiﬁed
mass extinction in order to be a parlous
loss. The world needs to get its biogeo-
chemical cycles back in balance and to halt
the warming, the rising and the acidiﬁca-
tion of its oceans. The needs of biodiver-
sity and human welfare are, in this respect,
well aligned. 
When it comes to coping with the dam-
age already done, and that which cannot
be averted, Mr Thomas suggests that peo-
ple must get over their desire to conserve
particular ecosystems in the form to which
they are accustomed. He does not see
much point in throwing resources at all en-
dangered species—especially those, such
as many of New Zealand’s predatory-
mammal-beset ﬂightless birds, that he
deems unlikely to make it without con-
stant assistance. Instead, he says, concen-
trate not on familiar landscapes but on
their living components; create and em-
brace novel ecosystems in which creatures
expelled or emancipated from their ances-
tral homes can ﬁnd new life. 
Such creative utilitarianism may in-
spire some. But it will make conservation a
more fractious ﬁeld than it was when it
was mostly a matter of whales and hope.
Who gets to create the new, and in whose
name? Who gets to reject it, and by what
right? Much of what people get from con-
servation is a sense of commitment to both
the future and the past. That commitment
does not have to be a rational allocation of
resources for it to feel worthwhile; it is not
necessarily diminished by scant chances
of success. Indeed, its likely failure can give
it a Sisyphean depth. If ﬁghting for in situ
species that Mr Thomas sees as doomed
adds value to people’s lives, it is hard to 
begrudge them that boon. 7

64 Books and arts

Fiction

Strength and
protection

Elmet. By Fiona Mozley. John Murray; 310
pages; £10.99
“DADDY and Cathy and I lived in a
small house that Daddy built with
materials from the land here about.” From
this apparently simple premise, Fiona 
Mozley (pictured) unfurls a dark and deli-
cate fairy-tale of contemporary Britain that
has propelled “Elmet”, the young author’s
debut novel, onto the longlist for this year’s
Man Booker prize for ﬁction.
The novel takes its title from the Celtic
kingdom that once covered Yorkshire,
where ancient forests harboured mythical
green men and one “Robyn Hode”. In Ms
Mozley’s vision, vestiges of that tooth-and-
claw order still exist in today’s world: the
powerful prey on the weak in lawless
pockets of the country. Her novel pits an
odd family of squatters against the local
landowner in an isolated copse that, like
the depressed neighbouring towns, can-
not be seen by passengers streaking by on
the London-to-Edinburgh railway line.
Narrated with almost fanatical preci-
sion by Daniel, the 14-year-old son, the
book draws readers into the family’s
“strange, sylvan otherworld” on the mar-
gins of society. “Daddy” has withdrawn
with his teenage children—motherless, 
untutored, nearly feral—to the woods. A
“bearded giant” who once served as the
landowner’s enforcer, Daddy is a towering
ﬁgure, a Robin Hood with huge ﬁsts. He
ﬁghts other men for cash in hidden rem-
nants of the wild that are frequented by

Young and gifted

travellers and others scrabbling to survive.
Each carefully chosen detail illumi-
nates the novel’s themes of violence and
exploitation. Yet far from being bleak, “El-
met” is beautiful. Ms Mozley writes with
clarity and insight, and her descriptions of
the natural world and human relation-
ships are both speciﬁc and profound.
Alongside the pervasive brutality there is
innocence, intimacy and love. To his chil-
dren, John Smythe stands as a defender
and protector. “That, after all, was why
Daddy had moved us here,” Daniel ex-
plains. “He wanted to keep us separate, in
ourselves, apart from the world.”
Alas, the world will not let them be.
With very few missteps, this accomplished
novel builds to a devastating conclusion.
Like another great work about a family on
the margins, “Housekeeping”, the 1980 
debut by Marilynne Robinson, an Ameri-
can novelist and essayist, “Elmet” is a quiet
explosion of a book, exquisite and unfor-
gettable. It is hard not to feel that at 29, Ms
Mozley has only just begun. 7

Expenditure among the aﬄuent

How to spend it

The Sum of Small Things: A Theor y of the
Aspirational Class. By Elizabeth

Curr id-Halkett. Pr inceton University Press;
254 pages; $29.95 and £24.95
STATUS symbols are as old as humanity
itself. It was only once ancient Rome 
became rich enough for plebeians to deco-
rate their homes that elites sought to do
one better by installing mosaics in their vil-
las; in Victorian England working-class
women began to don worsted stockings to
mimic the silk hosiery of the 1%. At the end
of the 19th century Thorstein Veblen, an
American sociologist, decried the “con-
spicuous leisure” of the robber barons of
his age, who set themselves apart through
their ability to avoid labour; he went on to
bemoan the “conspicuous consumption”
of the working classes seeking to imitate
the wealthy’s access to luxury goods.
Conspicuous
consumption persists
today. But just as the patricians of classical
times changed their habits once the
masses gained the ability to copy them, so
too have modern American elites recoiled
from accumulating mere goods now that
globalisation has made them aﬀordable to
the middle class. Instead, argues Elizabeth
Currid-Halkett, a professor at the Universi-
ty of Southern California, in “The Sum of
Small Things”, they have begun consum-
ing the fruits of “conspicuous production”:
socially worthy things
like fair-trade 
coﬀee. They also emphasise “inconspicu-

The Economist August 5th 2017

ous consumption”, of services like educa-
tion. Far from making the world more
egalitarian, this shift, in particular, threat-
ens to entrench modern elites’ privileged
position more eﬀectively than the habits of
their predecessors ever did.
As inequality has increased over the
years, so have researchers’ attempts to
grapple with its causes and consequences.
Ms Currid-Halkett distinguishes herself 
by bridging the divide between qualitative
and quantitative approaches. Her book
has no shortage of anecdotes to illustrate
cultural trends and it digs deep into the de-
tail of the Consumer Expenditure Survey,
administered by the Bureau of Labour Sta-
tistics. Using the survey’s data from thou-
sands of respondents, she paints a remark-
ably ﬁne-grained portrait of how the
spending habits of Americans have
evolved over the decades. 
Deﬁning “conspicuous consumption”
as “apparel, watches, jewellery, cars and
other socially visible goods”, she ﬁnds that
even though the poor must dedicate much
of their income to basic necessities, they
devote a higher share of their total spend-
ing to conspicuous consumption than the
rich do. And the trend is gaining steam. 
Between 1996 and 2014 the richest 1% fell
further behind the national average in the
percentage of their spending dedicated to
bling. The middle income quintile went
the other way: by 2014 they spent 35% more
than the average as a percentage of their 
annual expenditure.
Rather than ﬁlling garages with ﬂashy
cars, the data show, today’s rich devote
their budgets to less visible but more valu-
able ends. Chief among them is education
for their children: the top 10% now allocate
almost four times as much of their spend-
ing to school and university as they did in
1996, whereas for other groups the ﬁgure 

1

Keeping cool in LA

The Economist August 5th 2017 

2

has hardly budged. They also invest heavi-
ly in domestic services such as housekeep-
ers, freeing up time that the less fortunate
must spend on chores. 
Rather than frittering away that pre-
cious leisure time on frivolities, as Veblen’s
leisure class did, they devote it to enriching
experiences, like attending the opera, holi-
daying in far-oﬀ lands and working out at
fancy gyms. Their children, by tagging
along and thus absorbing this “cultural
capital”, develop the sophistication need-
ed to win admission to selective universi-
ties, vastly increasing the odds that they
will form the next generation’s elite. The

Books and arts 65

modern equivalent of Victorian worsted-
stocking wearers are hipsters, who imitate
the wealthy’s penchant
for
farmers’ 
markets and fair-trade lattes, even if they
cannot aﬀord a cruise to Antarctica.
“The Sum of Small Things” both un-
earths evocative diﬀerences between big
American cities—for example, Los Angeles
leads in bottled-water consumption, while
New York does in spending on shoes—and
makes clear that the “aspirational class”
Ms Currid-Halkett proﬁles is almost exclu-
sively coastal and urban. However, that
may yield a lopsided portrait of the top of
the income pile: largely absent from her

tale are the business-minded rich in politi-
cally conservative states. 
The reader learns that residents of Dal-
las and Houston dedicate unusually low
shares of spending to housing costs and to
fresh fruit, and a relatively high portion to
textiles, furniture and beauty products
such as wigs—but not whether the rich
among them mimic their blue-state coun-
terparts in seeking to project virtue via
heirloom tomatoes and the like. Perhaps a
sequel might explore the values of Sun Belt
suburbanites, and how this other half of
privileged Americans
signal 
status
through their spending. 7

Johnson

Game of tongues

“Game of Thrones” features the most fully developed linguistic universe since Tolkien
WINNING 38 Emmy awards is a good
measure of success. “Game of
Thrones” garnered that many for its por-
trayal of a world of sex, violence and poli-
tics. Westeros and Essos seem so real that
some viewers could imagine moving
there. Part of that detail has been the cre-
ation of the richest linguistic universe
since J.R.R. Tolkien’s Middle Earth.
Tolkien was a linguistic obsessive who
spoke Greek, Latin, Anglo-Saxon and
Gothic as a child and went on to study
many other tongues. He started inventing
languages in his teens, and said he created
Middle Earth to help this, not the other
way round. The most developed were
two forms of Elvish, called Quenya and
Sindarin. Tolkien gave Sindarin the same
kinds of historical sound changes that
had produced the European languages he
loved: cw-sounds became p-sounds in
Sindarin, just as had happened in the ear-
ly history of Welsh. He riﬄed through Old
Norse and Old English for inspiration,
and Finnish was a particular favourite.
In the ﬁeld of language-creation for ﬁc-
tional worlds, there is Tolkien, and there is
everybody else. But David Peterson, the
language-smith of “Game of Thrones”,
comes a close second for the amount of
thought put into its two languages, Doth-
raki and Valyrian. The interest in these
tongues is such that Living Language, a 
respected language-textbook publisher,
has already produced a volume for learn-
ing Dothraki, while Duolingo, a popular
online language-learning platform, now
oﬀers a course in High Valyrian.
In his book Mr Peterson describes his
baﬄement at the ﬁctional languages of
his youth. The “Star Wars” ﬁlms featured
foreign “languages” that were nothing
more than a series of weird sounds. He
wondered how on the planet of Tatooine
the bounty hunter in “Return of the Jedi”

could express “50,000—no less” as yotó
yotó. Decades later, with a master’s degree
in linguistics, he made Dothraki and Valyr-
ian as rich and realistic as possible, a 
process he describes in his book “The Art
of Language 
Invention”, which was
published in 2015.
Creating words is the easy part; anyone
can string together nonsense syllables. But
Mr Peterson, like Tolkien, took the trouble
to give his words etymologies and cousins,
so that the word for “feud” is related to the
words “blood” and “ﬁght”. To make the
languages pronounceable but clearly for-
eign, he put non-English sounds in high-
frequency words (like khaleesi, or queen),
put the stress in typically non-English
places, and had words begin with combi-
nations of sounds that are impossible in
English, like hr. 
Armed with a knowledge of common
linguistic sound changes, he gives his lan-
guages the kinds of irregularities and disor-

der that arise in the real world. High Valyr-
ian is a classical language with daughter
languages. Mr Peterson took Latin’s evo-
lution into the Romance languages as an
inspiration. Consonants
soften from
stops (where the airﬂow is blocked com-
pletely) to fricatives (where the air is
merely slowed in the mouth). So b be-
comes v, g becomes a gurgled gh, and so
on: High Valyrian’s obar (“curve”) be-
comes Astapori Valyrian’s uvor. Words’
meanings—as in real life—drift, too, giving
the system more realistic messiness. 
The writers also deserve credit for sto-
rylines in which language plays a promi-
nent role. Dothraki is the guttural lan-
guage of a horse-borne warrior nation,
but high-born Danaerys Targarean does
not look down on it; methodically learn-
ing it is key to her rise. She also skillfully
conceals her knowledge of the language
when it proves useful. Tyrion Lannister is
left to administer the city of Mereen de-
spite his ropy command of Valyrian, lead-
ing to some comic moments. And a
prophecy of a future hero is revealed to
have new meaning when an interpreter
explains that the word in question is am-
biguous in Valyrian—it could be “prince”
or “princess”. 
It might seem odd that a highly sexist
society like the one of “Game of Thrones”
would have languages where sex roles
were not clearly marked: what, only one
word for “prince” and “princess” when
women are almost always barred from
the throne? But Mr Peterson is good on
this in his book. Languages are not always
(or even usually) perfect and eﬃcient 
vehicles for a culture; random change can
leave them with too many words for one
concept, and not enough for another. In
this way, the ﬂawed nature of language 
reﬂects the foibles of ﬂawed humans and
the imperfect worlds they strive to create.

66

Tenders

Appointments

Your Chance to Represent Hong Kong, Asia’s Business Capital

Invitation to Companies to bid for the Provision of Investment 
Promotion Support Services for Invest Hong Kong (InvestHK)
As Asia’s business capital, Hong Kong offers sophisticated world-class infrastructure, 
logistics and fi nancial services coupled with a transparent legal system, clean government, 
low tax and an enviable position as the gateway to China.
InvestHK is the department of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region Government 
responsible for Foreign Direct Investment, supporting overseas and Mainland businesses to 
set up and expand in Hong Kong.
InvestHK invites companies with experience in investment promotion, economic 
development, or international business development to submit an expression of interest for 
provision of the following services in one or more markets of Brazil, France, Italy, Korea, 
MENA, Russia, the CIS and Baltic States (as one market), South America (except 
Brazil), Thailand and Turkey.
• To act as a representative offi ce of InvestHK and actively promote Hong Kong as a 
premier business location in Asia
• To identify target companies in priority sectors and markets through desk research, 
networking, attendance of conferences and exhibitions
• To respond to enquiries from potential investors by providing timely advice and 
practical assistance
• To develop and implement annual business plans for promoting inward investment to 
Hong Kong and to achieve key performance indicators
• To organise and support investment promotion visits by InvestHK head offi ce teams
• To develop links and networks with business multiplier organisations and the media 
Interested Companies based in the markets above are invited to email a short profi le 
of their company highlighting their business capabilities, including experience in 
investment promotion, economic development, or international business development and 
business network in the specifi ed market, in performing the aforementioned services to 
IPConsultant@investhk.gov.hk in English by 12:00 noon, 18 August 2017 Hong Kong 
time; any late response will not be considered. Selected companies will be provided with 
a service brief with more detailed scope of services and other information and invited to 
submit a formal proposal.
Only shortlisted companies will be notifi ed. Companies which do not hear from InvestHK by 
1 September 2017 should consider their bids unsuccessful.
For further information on InvestHK, please visit our website at www.InvestHK.gov.hk

Courses

The Financial Conduct Authority (FCA) and the Bank of England Prudential 
Regulation Authority (PRA) are seeking an exceptional candidate to Chair 
the Financial Services Compensation Scheme (FSCS) from 1 April 2018. The 
appointment will be made by the FCA and the PRA, subject to the approval of 
HM Treasury.
The FSCS makes a key contribution to ﬁ nancial stability by ensuring that 
consumers are protected when ﬁ nancial services businesses fail and by promoting 
consumer conﬁ dence through raising awareness of the consumer protection 
available. The FSCS operates independently, with the FCA and PRA accountable 
for ensuring that the FSCS is capable of exercising its responsibilities. 
The Chair is responsible for chairing and overseeing the performance of the FSCS 
board. You will lead the Board in setting the FSCS’s strategy and represent the 
FSCS in dealings with industry, regulatory and government stakeholders at the 
most senior level. You will ensure that the FSCS fulﬁ ls its mission to provide a 
responsive, efﬁ cient and accountable compensation service which is ready to 
respond to ﬁ nancial services failures.
Candidates will have extensive experience of operating as a non-executive, with 
experience of chairing a Board an advantage. You will be able to demonstrate 
support for and challenge to executives in delivering services efﬁ ciently. You will 
have managed multiple diverse stakeholders successfully at the most senior level, 
while ensuring clear and open communications. You are likely to have gained 
this track record in the ﬁ nancial services sector, although candidates from a 
wider range of backgrounds will also be welcomed. Experience of working with 
government and regulators will also be an advantage.
The time commitment is between one and two days a week and the remuneration 
is £75,000.

Please provide a CV and covering letter to our advisors,
Moloney Search at fscs@moloneysearch.com or Moloney Search at
4 Kensington Cloisters, 5 Kensington Church Street, London W8 4LD.

Applicants will need to disclose any potential conﬂ icts of interest.
The closing date for applications is 4 September 2017.

The Common Fund for Commodities (CFC) is an intergovernmental fi nancial 
institution established by the United Nations and is based in Amsterdam, 
the Netherlands. The CFC invites applications for the position of:

Impact Strategy Officer (UN Scale: P-2 / P-3)

The Impact Strategy Officer will reinforce systematic repor ting, monitoring, 
measurement and presentation of impact across the CFC’s project 
por tfolio. The ideal candidate will have an advanced university degree in 
development, economics or business along with strong technical skills and 
3 to 7 years’ experience in a project or analytical role.
The closing date for applications is 16 September 2017. Fur ther information 
and detailed Terms of Reference are available at www.common-fund.org

 Business & Personal

FX & Gaming Licenses
Swedish Trusts
Payment Processing 
Systems
Offshore Banks
Instant Citizenships & 
Residencies

www.global-money.com
www.gmccitizenships.com

Readers are recommended

to make appropriate enquiries and 
take appropriate advice before 
sending money, incurring any 
expense or entering into a binding 
commitment in relation to an 
advertisement.
The Economist Newspaper Limited 
shall not be liable to any person for 
loss or damage incurred or suffered 
as a result of his/her accepting or 
offering to accept an invitation 
contained in any advertisement 
published in The Economist.

The Economist August 5th 2017

Appointments

67

The Economist August 5th 2017

68

Economic and ﬁnancial indicators

The Economist August 5th 2017

Economic data

Gross domestic product 

Industr ial 
production 

Consumer pr ices Unemployment 
rate, % 

Current-account balance 

Statistics on 42 economies, plus a
closer look at purchasing manag-
ers’ indexes

Economic data

% change on year ago

latest 

+6.9 Q2 
+1.3 Q1 
+1.7 Q2 
+2.3 Q1 
+2.1 Q2 
+2.3 Q1 
+1.5 Q2 
+1.8 Q2 
+1.7 Q1 
+0.8 Q1 
+1.2 Q1 
+3.2 Q1 
+3.1 Q2 

United States +2.1 Q2 
China 
Japan 
Br itain 
Canada 
Euro area 
Austr ia 
Belgium 
France 
Germany 
Greece 
Italy 
Netherlands 
Spain 
Czech Republic +4.0 Q1 
Denmark 
Norway 
Poland 
Russia 
Sweden  
Switzerland 
Turkey 
Australia 
Hong Kong 
India 
Indonesia 
Malaysia 
Pakistan 
Philippines 
Singapore 
South Korea 
Taiwan 
Thailand 
Argentina 
Brazil 
Chile 
Colombia 
Mexico 
Venezuela 
Egypt 
Israel 
Saudi Arabia 
South Afr ica 

+3.6 Q1 
+2.6 Q1 
+4.4 Q1 
+0.5 Q1 
+3.9 Q2 
+1.1 Q1 
+5.0 Q1 
+1.7 Q1 
+4.3 Q1 
+6.1 Q1 
+5.0 Q1 
+5.6 Q1 

+6.4 Q1 
+2.5 Q2 
+2.7 Q2 
+2.1 Q2 
+3.3 Q1 
+0.3 Q1 
-0.4 Q1 
+0.1 Q1 
+1.1 Q1 
+1.8 Q2 
-8.8 Q4~ 
+4.3 Q1 
+4.0 Q1 
+1.7 2016 
+1.0 Q1 

+5.7 2017** 

qtr* 2017† 
+2.6 +2.2 
+7.0 +6.7 
+1.0 
+1.3 
+1.2 
+1.6 
+3.7 +2.3 
+2.3 
+1.9 
+5.7 
+1.8 
+1.6 
+1.6 
+2.2 
+1.5 
+2.4 
+1.8 
+1.8 
+1.0 
+1.8 
+1.1 
+1.7 +2.2 
+3.6 +2.9 
+6.3 +3.0 
+2.5 
+1.6 
+0.9 
+1.8 
+4.5 +3.6 
na 
+1.4 
+7.1 +2.6 
+1.1 
+1.4 
na +3.4 
+1.1 +2.4 
+2.9 +3.0 
+7.2 
+7.1 
na +5.2 
na +5.2 
na +5.7 
+4.5 +6.5 
+0.4 +2.9 
+2.4 +2.6 
+0.6 +2.4 
+5.2 +3.4 
+4.3 +2.5 
+4.3 +0.6 
+0.7 
+1.5 
-0.9 +2.0 
+2.4 +2.0 
-6.2 
-7.0 
na +3.7 
+1.4 
+4.1 
na 
-0.5 
-0.7 +0.7 

latest 
latest 
2017† 
+2.0 Jun 
+1.6 Jun 
+2.0 
+7.6 Jun 
+1.5 Jun 
+2.0 
+4.9 Jun 
+0.3 Jun 
+0.6 
-0.3 May 
+2.6 Jun 
+2.7 
+12.6 May 
+1.0 Jun 
+1.8 
+4.0 May 
+1.3 Jul 
+1.6 
+3.6 May 
+1.9 Jun 
+2.0 
+2.0 May 
+1.8 Jul 
+2.2 
+3.2 May 
+0.7 Jul 
+1.2 
+4.9 May 
+1.7 Jul 
+1.7 
+5.4 May 
+1.0 Jun 
+1.3 
+2.8 May 
+1.1 Jul 
+1.4 
+3.8 May 
+1.1 Jun 
+1.2 
+4.6 May 
+1.5 Jul 
+2.0 
+8.1 May 
+2.3 Jun 
+2.3 
+6.2 May 
+0.6 Jun 
+1.2 
-1.4 May 
+1.9 Jun 
+2.4 
+4.5 Jun 
+1.7 Jul 
+1.8 
+3.6 Jun 
+4.4 Jun 
+4.2 
+8.0 May 
+1.7 Jun 
+1.6 
-1.3 Q1 
+0.2 Jun 
+0.5 
+4.1 May +10.9 Jun 
+10.2 
-0.8 Q1 
+1.9 Q2 
+2.2 
+0.2 Q1 
+2.0 Jun 
+1.6 
+1.7 May 
+1.5 Jun 
+4.2 
+4.0 May 
+3.9 Jul 
+4.3 
+4.6 May 
+3.6 Jun 
+3.9 
+6.6 May 
+2.9 Jul 
+4.2 
+5.8 May 
+2.7 Jun 
+3.0 
+13.1 Jun 
+0.5 Jun 
+1.3 
-0.3 Jun 
+2.2 Jul 
+1.9 
+3.1 Jun 
+1.0 Jun 
+0.5 
-0.2 Jun 
+0.2 Jul 
+0.7 
-2.5 Oct +21.9 Jun‡ +24.2 
+0.5 Jun 
+3.0 Jun 
+3.8 
-2.2 Jun 
+1.7 Jun 
+2.8 
-0.6 May 
+4.0 Jun 
+4.1 
+1.0 May 
+6.3 Jun 
+5.4 
+0.8 Sep 
na  
+569 
+25.1 May +29.8 Jun +22.8 
-1.5 May 
-0.2 Jun 
+0.5 
na  
-0.4 Jun 
+2.2 
-1.9 May 
+5.1 Jun 
+5.5 

latest 12 
months, $bn 
-449.3 Q1 
+169.5 Q1 
+188.6 May 
-99.8 Q1 
-48.4 Q1 
+388.6 May 
+6.4 Q1 
-4.2 Mar 
-22.4 May 
+272.4 May 
-0.9 May 
+48.6 May 
+68.4 Q1 
+21.5 May 
+1.4 Q1 
+26.1 May 
+22.4 Q1 
-2.2 May 
+33.6 Q2 
+22.0 Q1 
+73.6 Q1 
-35.3 May 
-25.0 Q1 
+14.8 Q1 
-15.2 Q1 
-14.6 Q1 
+6.6 Q1 
-12.1 Q2 
-0.4 Mar 
+59.0 Q1 
+83.3 Jun 
+69.1 Q1 
+44.9 Q2 
-16.8 Q1 
-14.3 Jun 
-5.0 Q1 
-11.9 Q1 
-22.0 Q1 
-17.8 Q3~ 
-18.0 Q1 
+11.7 Q1 
-1.0 Q1 
-7.9 Q1 

% of GDP 
2017† 
-2.6 
+1.6 
+3.6 
-3.1 
-2.6 
+3.1 
+2.3 
+0.3 
-1.2 
+8.0 
-1.2 
+2.1 
+9.4 
+1.8 
+0.9 
+7.7 
+7.6 
-0.5 
+2.2 
+4.8 
+9.9 
-4.4 
-1.6 
+5.8 
-1.2 
-1.7 
+2.2 
-3.8 
+0.4 
+19.1 
+6.0 
+12.8 
+11.5 
-2.8 
-1.0 
-1.4 
-3.6 
-2.2 
-1.1 
-5.9 
+4.1 
+1.3 
-3.2 

4.4 Jun 
4.0 Q2§ 
2.8 Jun 

4.5 Apr†† 

6.5 Jun 
9.1 Jun 
5.2 Jun 
7.6 Mar 
9.6 Jun 

3.8 Jun‡ 

21.7 Apr 
11.1 Jun 
6.0 Jun 
17.1 Jun 

2.9 Jun‡ 

4.3 May 

4.3 May‡‡ 
7.1 Jun§ 
5.1 Jun§ 
7.4 Jun§ 

3.2 Jun 
10.5 Apr§ 
5.6 Jun 

3.1 Jun‡‡ 
5.0 2015 

5.3 Q1§ 

3.4 May§ 
5.9 2015 

5.7 Q2§ 
2.2 Q2 

3.8 Jun§ 

3.8 Jun 

1.1 Jun§ 

9.2 Q1§ 
13.0 Jun§ 

7.0 Jun§‡‡ 
8.7 Jun§ 

3.3 Jun 

7.3 Apr§ 

12.0 Q1§ 
4.5 Jun 

5.6 2016 

27.7 Q1§ 

Budget 
balance 

Interest
rates, %

% of GDP 10-year gov't 
2017† 
bonds, latest 
-3.5 
2.27 
-4.1 
3.59§§ 
-5.1 
0.08 
-3.6 
1.24 
-2.4 
1.94 
-1.4 
0.49 
-1.2 
0.69 
-2.1 
0.79 
-3.1 
0.74 
+0.5 
0.49 
-1.3 
5.49 
-2.3 
2.02 
+0.7 
0.60 
-3.3 
1.60 
-0.5 
0.90 
-0.6 
0.61 
+4.2 
1.69 
-2.2 
3.37 
-2.1 
8.13 
+0.3 
0.72 
+0.2 
0.02 
-2.3 
10.58 
-1.8 
2.65 
+1.7 
1.50 
-3.2 
6.47 
-2.2 
6.79 
-3.0 
4.00 
-4.5 
8.17††† 
-2.8 
4.99 
-1.0 
2.15 
+0.9 
2.24 
-0.9 
1.06 
-2.3 
2.31 
-5.9 
na 
-7.8 
9.09 
-2.7 
4.25 
-3.2 
6.90 
-1.9 
6.84 
-19.5 
11.02 
-10.8 
na 
-2.6 
1.78 
-7.4 
3.68 
-3.2 
8.62 

Currency units, per $

Aug 2nd 
- 
6.72 
110 
0.76 
1.26 
0.84 
0.84 
0.84 
0.84 
0.84 
0.84 
0.84 
0.84 
0.84 
22.0 
6.27 
7.88 
3.59 
60.7 
8.10 
0.97 
3.53 
1.25 
7.82 
63.6 
13,324 
4.29 
105 
50.4 
1.36 
1,124 
30.2 
33.3 
17.6 
3.13 
653 
2,966 
17.9 
10.1 
17.9 
3.58 
3.75 
13.3 

year ago
-
6.64
101
0.75
1.31
0.89
0.89
0.89
0.89
0.89
0.89
0.89
0.89
0.89
24.1
6.63
8.43
3.86
66.5
8.52
0.96
2.99
1.31
7.76
66.8
13,098
4.04
105
47.0
1.34
1,110
31.7
34.8
14.8
3.26
655
3,076
18.9
9.99
8.88
3.81
3.75
14.0

Source: Haver Analytics.  *% change on previous quar ter, annual rate. †The Economist poll or Economist Intelligence Unit estimate/forecast. §Not seasonally adjusted. ‡New ser ies. ~2014 **Year ending June. ††Latest 
3 months. ‡‡3-month moving average. §§5-year yield. †††Dollar-denominated bonds. 

 
 
 
 
The Economist August 5th 2017 

Economic and ﬁnancial indicators 69

Markets

Index 

Markets

% change on
Dec 30th 2016
one 
in local 
in $
Aug 2nd week currency terms
22,016.2 
+1.4 
+11.4 +11.4
3,440.5 
+1.2 
+5.9 
+9.5
20,080.0 
+0.1 
+5.1 +11.0
7,411.4 
-0.5 
+3.8 +11.0
15,265.6 
+0.6 
-0.1 
+6.5
-0.9 
+6.6 +19.9
-0.9 
+5.1 +18.2
-0.4 
+23.3 +38.6
-0.4 
+9.2 +22.8
-1.6 
+5.0 +18.1
-1.0 
+6.1 +19.3
-0.5 
+28.3 +44.3
nil 
+12.2 +26.1
-0.5 
+8.7 +22.2
-0.5 
+12.4 +26.3
-0.1 
+9.7 
+27.6
-0.2 
+12.8 +26.7
+1.3 
+12.6 +28.8
+0.8 
+5.9 +15.7
+0.1 
+20.6 +40.3
+0.1 
-11.4 
-11.4
-1.1 
+3.0 +15.6
+1.5 
+11.0 +16.6
-0.6 
+36.3 +35.8
-0.5 
+1.3 +11.9
+2.5 
+25.5 +24.5
+0.3 
+22.0 +30.1
+0.4 
+10.0 +11.2
+0.3 
+7.9 +12.9
+2.3 
-1.8 
-2.7
+0.4 
+16.2 +23.7
-0.3 
+19.8 +28.7
+1.0 
+13.7 +21.3
-0.2 
+2.4 +10.2
+2.8 
+28.8 +16.2
+3.3 
+11.5 +15.9
+1.0 
+22.7 +25.9
+0.4 
+8.5 
+9.8
-0.8 
+12.2 +29.0
+9.1 
+363 
na
-2.8 
+8.6 +10.4
-1.1 
+1.0 
+8.6
-1.7 
-2.2 
-2.1
+0.7 
+9.0 +12.4

United States (DJIA) 
China (SSEA) 
Japan (Nikkei 225) 
Br itain (FTSE 100) 
Canada (S&P TSX) 
Euro area (FTSE Euro 100) 1,185.6 
Euro area (EURO STOXX 50) 3,459.3 
Austr ia (ATX) 
Belgium (Bel 20) 
France (CAC 40) 
Germany (DAX)* 
Greece (Athex Comp) 
Italy (FTSE/MIB) 
Netherlands (AEX) 
Spain (Madr id SE) 
Czech Republic (PX) 
Denmark (OMXCB) 
Hungary (BUX) 
Norway (OSEAX) 
Poland (WIG) 
Russia (RTS, $ terms) 
Sweden (OMXS30) 
Switzerland (SMI) 
Turkey (BIST) 
Australia (All Ord.) 
Hong Kong (Hang Seng) 
India (BSE) 
Indonesia (JSX) 
Malaysia (KLSE) 
Pakistan (KSE) 
Singapore (STI) 
South Korea (KOSPI) 
Taiwan (TWI)  
Thailand (SET) 
Argentina (MERV) 
Brazil (BVSP) 
Chile (IGPA) 
Colombia (IGBC) 
Mexico (IPC) 
Venezuela (IBC) 
Egypt (EGX 30) 
Israel (TA-125) 
Saudi Arabia (Tadawul) 
South Afr ica (JSE AS) 

3,229.0 
3,938.2 
5,107.3 
12,181.5 
826.0 
21,573.6 
525.3 
1,060.3 
1,010.6 
900.4 
36,041.1 
810.1 
62,409.5 
1,021.4 
1,563.2 
9,122.7 
106,525.4 
5,794.5 
27,607.4 
32,476.7 
5,824.3 
1,770.6 
46,949.0 
3,348.8 
2,427.6 
10,519.3 
1,580.5 
21,798.6 
67,135.9 
25,449.2 
10,961.0 
51,200.1 
146,877.8 
13,405.2 
1,289.9 
7,080.9 
55,200.5 

Manufactur ing activity

The latest manufactur ing data from IHS
Markit, a research ﬁrm, paints a reason-
ably cheer y picture. In Br itain the pur-
chasing managers’ index (PMI) rose for
the ﬁrst time in three months, to 55.1
(anything above 50 indicates an expan-
sion in activity). The weak pound helped
Br itish factor ies record the strongest r ise
in expor t orders since Apr il 2010. Al-
though the rate of expansion slowed in
the euro area, activity still increased in all
the countr ies sur veyed. China’s PMI
confounded expectations of a slowdown,
recording a four-month high of 51.4. In
India, however, the new goods-and-
ser vices tax weighed on manufactur ing:
the sector contracted at its steepest pace
in over eight years.

Other markets

Index 

334.0 
1,634.4 

Other markets

% change on
Dec 30th 2016
one 
in local 
in $
Aug 2nd week currency terms
2,477.6 
nil 
+10.7 +10.7
-0.9 
+18.2 +18.2
+1.3 
-2.3 
-2.3
+0.8 
+7.6 +13.7
-1.1 
+4.2 
+17.1
+0.4 
+12.5 +12.5
+0.7 
+24.1 +24.1
+0.5 
+13.7 +13.7
+1.3 
+6.9 
+6.9
+0.3 
+7.0 
+7.0
-0.1 
+3.6 
+3.6
+9.6 
+14.0 (levels)
-0.4 
-28.4 
-19.6
+0.1 
-16.9 
-16.9
+5.6 
-17.5 
-7.2

479.8 
945.0 
826.3 
1,246.5§ 
10.3 
51.6 
56.4 
5.4 

United States (S&P 500) 
United States (NAScomp) 6,362.7 
China (SSEB, $ terms) 
Japan (Topix) 
Europe (FTSEurof irst 300) 1,487.7 
World, dev'd (MSCI) 
Emerging markets (MSCI) 1,070.0 
World, all (MSCI) 
World bonds (Citigroup) 
EMBI+ (JPMorgan) 
Hedge funds (HFRX) 
Volatility, US (VIX) 
CDSs, Eur (iTRAXX)† 
CDSs, N Am (CDX)† 
Carbon trading (EU ETS) € 

1,970.3 

Sources: IHS Markit; Thomson Reuters.  *Total return index. 
†Credit-default-swap spreads, basis points. §Aug 1st.

Indicators for more countr ies and additional
Indicators for more countr ies and additional

ser ies, go to: Economist.com/indicators
ser ies, go to: Economist.com/indicators

Purchasing managers’ index*

Euro area

United
States

Br itain

India

China

58

56

54

52

50

48

46

†
g
n

i

d
n
a
p

x
E

†

g
n

i

t
c

a

r
t

n
o
C

A

S

O

N

D

J

F M A M J

J

2016

Sources: 
IHS Markit; CIPS;
Nikkei; Caixin

2017

*Based on a sur vey of
purchasing executives
†Compared with the previous month

The Economist commodity-pr ice index

2005=100

The Economist commodity-price index

% change on
one 
one
Aug 1st* month 
year

Dollar Index

All Items 
Food 
Industr ials 
 All 
 Nfa† 
 Metals 

Sterling Index

All items 

Euro Index

All items 

Gold

$ per oz 

Jul 25th 

144.8 
154.4 

134.8 
133.3 
135.4 

142.8 
152.4 

132.9 
123.8 
136.8 

-1.2 
-3.2 

+1.2 
-4.9 
+3.7 

+5.0
-1.1

+13.4
-1.2
+20.4

201.8 

196.3 

-3.5 

+5.7

154.4 

150.3 

-5.1 

-0.2

1,250.6 

1,272.5 

+4.0 

-6.9

West Texas Intermediate

$ per barrel 

47.9 

49.2 

+4.4 

+24.4

Sources: Bloomberg; CME Group; Cotlook; Darmenn & Curl; FT; ICCO;
ICO; ISO; Live Rice Index; LME; NZ Wool Ser vices; Thompson Lloyd & 
Ewar t; Thomson Reuters; Urner Barr y; WSJ.  *Provisional  
†Non-food agr iculturals.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
70

Obituar y Dr G. Yunupingu

Singing the land

Dr G. Yunupingu, the most beautiful voice in Australia, died on July 25th, aged 46
THE shoreline was where it began. This
on Elcho Island—he was carrying out his
was where Baru, his totemic animal,
duty of care for his people and the land. 
the saltwater crocodile, wandered and
He provided translations for his album
danced in the Dreamtime. Baru sang the
notes. They remained mysterious, a list of
names of the red cliﬀs, the mangrove
ancestors, places and his own likan, or
swamps, the creeks and stringybark trees.
deep names, which linked him to them.
And there, on the wide beach at the aborig-
(After his death these names, like his im-
inal outstation of Nayingburra on Elcho Is-
age, could not be used.) From each song
land, oﬀ north-east Arnhem Land, Dr G.
one striking scene would emerge: a cat
Yunupingu’s aunts Dorothy, Anne and Su-
walking out in the cool of the evening, two
san set up various sizes of tin cans in a row,
orange-footed scrubfowl crying out like
and gave the blind child sticks, so that he
keening women, or thunderheads making
could sing and play the land for himself in
the forms of ancestral spirits over the sea,
the steps of the ancestors. 
“reﬂections…for me”. 
When, many years later, he sang in Lon-
None of this he had ever seen. He was
don, China and New York; when he per-
born blind, as he sang in English, “and I
formed to standing ovations at the Sydney
don’t know why/God knows why, be-
Opera House, and his debut solo album,
cause he love me so.” As he grew up, his
“Gurrumul”, went triple platinum in Aus-
spirit understood. Blind, he could not learn
tralia, this was what he was singing about.
to spear ﬁsh, track bees for honey, ﬁnd bush
Almost no one knew. The plaintive tender-
tucker, or dig water-chestnuts out of the
ness of his high tenor voice and the sweet-
mud; he could not see the seven star-sisters
ness of his acoustic guitar were all that
whose cooking smoke made the horizon
mattered to his audience of enraptured Ba-
clouds before the Wet, or the sacred black
landa, white folk. Yet to him, sitting almost
mangrove stingray, Gawangalkmirri, with
motionless on stage, bulky in his black
stars on its back. His parents “cried their
leather jacket, his sightless eyes sunk even
hearts in confusion” over him, their ﬁrst
deeper with concentration, the point re-
child. But he could listen to the stories of
mained the words. He sang in English,
his Gumatj clan round the ﬁre, out on the
sometimes, about his life. When he sang in
beach, where families would gather to sit
his own Gumatj—one of several languages
and watch the waves. Those times of con-
of the Yolngu people, rarely spoken even
templation ﬂowed into his songs.

The Economist August 5th 2017

So too, musically, did all sorts of Ba-
landa inﬂuences. Gospel and Victorian
hymns came from the mission church he
went to with his mother and aunts, and
where he learned his ﬁrst guitar chords,
holding the instrument upside-down so he
could play it left-handed (a habit he kept).
Dire Straits, reggae and Stevie Wonder, also
blind, he heard on the radio. His was a mu-
sical clan, and he gave up school at 12 to
play drums and guitar in his uncle’s rock
band, which performed tribal songs. Later
he formed his own Saltwater Band, named
after Baru; and then he was taken up by Mi-
chael Hohnen, a young white musician
and co-founder of the Skinnyﬁsh label in
Darwin, who guided and protected him as
he progressed to global stardom. 
This was a dizzying trajectory. Elcho Is-
land, for all its beauty, was an enclave of
deepest poverty, its outstations full of rub-
bish and marauding dogs, with almost half
its population under 20, and many of
those sunk in kava-chewing and petrol-
sniﬃng. He had avoided that, but was still
barely educated in Balanda ways, how-
ever richly instructed in his own. He was
also sick, with Hepatitis B, because he had
not been vaccinated as a child, as a white
child would have been. Instead, as a new-
born, he was held over burning gum leaves
to make him strong. When his liver and
kidney trouble got worse and he went to
the Royal Darwin Hospital, the medical
staﬀ assumed this was alcohol abuse. His
early death was average for his people. 
All such deep injustice he was well
aware of. Much of the money he earned,
which he originally simply wanted to
share with his clan, went into a foundation
on the island to teach aboriginal children
the essential stories of their world. But no
bitterness entered his songs. Only trust: the
same conﬁdence in human goodness that
led him to depend on other people, rather
than Braille or a dog or a white stick, to help
him through life. “Please hold my hand,”
he sang, while he tried to “bridge and build
Yolngu culture” out to the white world. In-
tensely shy, he would not talk after his con-
certs, even with Mr Hohnen as his inter-
preter. He had made his point. 

A pit on the beach
In his last months, needing frequent dialy-
sis, he seldom managed to get back to Elcho
Island. Yet this was where the spirits of the
ancestors determined he should go to die.
He needed to be on a beach that Baru had
named in song in his wanderings, and
with his family when they came there to
sit. So like Gawangalkmirri, the stingray, he
made a shallow pit in the sand that he
could lie in, and slept there on occasion.
Some Balanda thought he was just long-
grassing, sleeping rough, like other drunks.
He was listening to the waves, and the old
creation-songs. 7

(cid:31)(cid:30)%

o(cid:29) 

the standard 
rate
with code 
TE(cid:29)(cid:29)(cid:29)(cid:28)

Register today and save

INNOVAT ION A S 
COMPET IT ION

Australia ’s 
Asian Future Summit 
2017

September 1st 
2017
Sydne y

Featured speakers:

LARRY MARSHALL
Chief executive
CSIRO

FLAVIA TATA NARDINI
Chief executive 
Fleet Space Technologies

JOANNA BATSTONE
Chief technology o(cid:27)  cer, 
Australia and New Zealand 
IBM

CHARLIE DAY
Chief executive 
O(cid:28)  ce of Innovation and 
Science Australia

Australian R&D: Why can’t you show me the money?
Australian space startups and other companies are relying on private 
or overseas funding to push forward their ideas. Without greater 
government support , does Australia risk losing many of its best , 
home-grown innovations as ﬁ rms look overseas in order to remain 
competitive and ﬂ ourish?
Join Innovation as competition: Australia’s Asian Future 
Summit 2017 for a stimulating discussion on how the country can 
boost its competitive capacities.

Contact us:

+852 2585 3312

asiaevents@economist.com

innovationascompetition.economist .com

@EconomistEvents 
#AusInnov

Plat inum sponsor

App sponsor

Always one step ahead of the game.

Predictions prove a bright future for you.  
Our autonomous vehicle will be safer, smarter and 
instinctively more brilliant than anything on the road.

HYUNDAI is a registered trademark of Hyundai Motor Company. All rights reserved. ©2017 Hyundai Motor Company.

