China and Russia: unlikely friends

The dotcom flop that ’s back on top

In defence of childlessness

Sunscreen, science and serendipity

JULY 29TH– AUGUST 4TH 2017

Venezuela in chaos

What the world should do

‘ We believe cycling fans deserve  
a revolutionary viewing experience’ 

Yann Le Moenner - Managing Director of A .S.O., organisers of the Tour de France

If you believe you can do anything,  
we’re here to help you do it.

For more great stories of how we help our clients achieve great things with technology 
visit dimensiondata.com/StoriesOfGreatness

Contents

The Economist July 29th 2017 3

5 The world this week

Leaders
7 The wages of chavismo

Venezuela’s agony

8 China’s navy

The new gunboat
diplomacy

8 UK-US trade

A special relationship with
reality

9 AI in China

Code red

10 Demography

In defence of the childless

Letters
12 On the German economy

Br ieﬁng
16 Venezuela

The mess tropical Marxism
makes

Asia
19 Indian infrastructure

Power ing ahead

20 Politics in Japan

Gr illing Shinzo Abe

20 Labour in the Philippines

The president’s broken
promise

21 Korean hairstor y

How wigs tell the stor y of
South Korea

22 Banyan

Danger in the Himalayas

China
23 China and Russia

Unlikely par tners

United States
25 Labour shortages

The market for lemons

26 Sanctions against Russia

They don’t trust him

27 Jeﬀ Sessions in per il

The next big cr isis?

28 Health reform

Getting thinner

28 Gender politics

Trans action-man

29 Detroit, the movie

Riots remembered

29 New York neighbourhoods

Harlem shuﬄe

30 Lexington

Norman Rockwell

The Amer icas
31 Migration to Mexico

Fewer r ivers to cross

32 Banking for the FARC

Capitalism 101

Middle East and Afr ica
33 Libya’s civil war

The increasing hef t of
General Haf tar

34 Morocco and Alger ia

Open Sesame

35 Israel’s submar ine
scandal

In deep water

35 Lobbying in Afr ica

For whom Bell Pottinger
toils

36 Animal health in Afr ica

An end to goat plague?

Europe
37 Illiberalism in Poland

Objection sustained

38 The EU’s Article 7

Policing the club

39 French unions

Mild or militant?

40 Turkey’s purges

Absurdity in power

41 Charlemagne

Brussels bookshelf

Br itain
42 The car industr y

Mini boost, major problems

43 Charlie Gard

Peace at last

44 Schools that teach parents

New tr icks

44 Gerontocracy

Pensioners’ parliament

45 Bagehot

Ruth Davidson, 
nor thern star

On the cover
Venezuela is sliding from
economic catastrophe to
dictatorship. What the world
should do: leader, page 7.
Nicolás Maduro’s attempt to
impose dictatorship could
end bloodily, page 16

The Economist online

Daily analysis and opinion to
supplement the pr int edition, plus
audio and video, and a daily char t
Economist.com
E-mail: newsletters and
mobile edition
Economist.com/email
Pr int edition: available online by
7pm London time each Thursday
Economist.com/pr int
Audio edition: available online 
to download each Fr iday
Economist.com/audioedition

Volume 424 Number 9051

Published since September 1843

to take par t in "a severe contest between 
intelligence, which presses forward, and 
an unwor thy, timid ignorance obstructing 
our progress."

Editorial oﬃces in London and also:

Atlanta, Beijing, Berlin, Brussels, Cairo, Chicago,
Lima, Mexico City, Moscow, Mumbai, Nairobi, 
New Delhi, New York, Par is, San Francisco, 
São Paulo, Seoul, Shanghai, Singapore, Tokyo,
Washington DC

China and Russia The

extension of China’s mar itime
power across the world is not
necessar ily a bad thing:
leader, page 8. Xi Jinping and
Vladimir Putin are cosying up.
But mutual suspicions run
deep, page 23

Poland A takeover of the
judiciar y has been halted, but
the rule of law is still under
threat, page 37

Big deal? Br itain and Amer ica
suﬀer from similar delusions
when it comes to trade: leader,
page 8

1

Contents continues overleaf

4 Contents

The Economist July 29th 2017

Science and technology
60 War fare

Know your enemy

61 Bor ing technology

Underground adventures

62 Multiple sclerosis

Unexpected protection

Books and arts
63 Food from the Amer ican
South

Dinner in black and white

64 St Petersburg

White nights, dark histor y

64 Dalits in India

Ants among elephants

65 Of pigs and birds

Creature consor ts

66 Wayne McGregor’s
choreography

Man on a mission

68 Economic and ﬁnancial
indicators

Statistics on 42 economies,
plus a closer look at South
Afr ica

Obituar y
70 Ir ina Ratushinskaya

Wr itten on soap

International
46 Demography

The r ise of childlessness

Business
48 Online travel

The Pr iceline par ty

49 Equal pay

Gap analysis

50 German carmakers

Exhausted

50 China’s market for music

A pirate’s life no more

51 Fashion and data

AI la mode

52 Schumpeter

Afr ica’s consumption
conundrum

Economics br ief
53 The theor y of the ﬁrm

Coase call

Finance and economics
55 Bitcoin’s civil war

Breaking the chains

56 Buttonwood

Tech stocks

57 Crops and conﬂict

A bitter har vest

58 Retail banking

Withdrawal symptoms

58 Financial innovation

Pandemic bonds

59 Free exchange

Competition in Amer ica

Childlessness More and more

Westerners have no oﬀspr ing.
They should not be cr iticised
for it: leader, page 10. Rising
childlessness is much less
worr ying than it appears, 
page 46

Tech ﬁrms Lef t for dead af ter
the dotcom boom, a low-proﬁle
internet company has staged
an impressive comeback, page
48. Tech stocks have regained
their dotcom-era highs:
Buttonwood, page 56

Economics br ief If markets

are so good at directing
resources, why do ﬁrms exist?
The ﬁrst in our summer ser ies
on big economic ideas, page 53

Science and serendipity

A chance ﬁnding may lead to a
treatment for a terr ible
illness, page 62

Subscription service

For our full range of subscription offers, 
including digital only or print and digital 
combined visit
Economist.com/offers
You can subscribe or renew your subscription 
by mail, telephone or fax at the details below:
Telephone: +65 6534 5166 
Facsimile: +65 6534 5066
Web: 
Economist.com/offers
E-mail: 
Post: 

Asia@subscriptions.economist.com

The Economist 
Subscription Centre,
Tanjong Pagar Post Office
PO Box 671
Singapore 910817 

Subscription for 1 year (51 issues)Print only

Australia 
China 
Hong Kong & Macau 
India 
Japan 
Korea 
Malaysia 
New Zealand 
Singapore & Brunei 
Taiwan 
Thailand 
Other countries 

A$465
CNY 2,300
HK$2,300
 10,000
Yen 44,300
KRW 375,000
RM 780
NZ$530
S$425
NT$9,000
US$300
Contact us as above

Pr incipal commercial oﬃces:

25 St James’s Street, London sw1a 1hg
Tel: +44 20 7830 7000
Rue de l’Athénée 32
1206 Geneva, Switzerland
Tel: +41 22 566 2470 
750 3rd Avenue, 5th Floor, New York, NY 10017 
Tel: +1 212 541 0500 
1301 Cityplaza Four,
12 Taikoo Wan Road, Taikoo Shing, Hong Kong
Tel: +852 2585 3888

Other commercial oﬃces:

Chicago, Dubai, Frankfur t, Los Angeles,
Par is, San Francisco and Singapore 

PEFC certiﬁed
This copy of The Economist
is pr inted on paper sourced
from sustainably managed
forests, recycled and controlled
sources cer tiﬁed by PEFC
www.pefc.org

PEFC/01-31-162

© 2017 The Economist Newspaper Limited. All r ights reser ved. Neither this publication nor any par t of it may be reproduced, stored in a retr ieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or
otherwise, without the pr ior permission of The Economist Newspaper Limited. Published ever y week, except for a year-end double issue, by The Economist Newspaper Limited. The Economist is a registered trademark of The Economist Newspaper Limited.
Publisher: The Economist. Pr inted by Times Pr inters (in Singapore).
M.C.I. (P) No.030/09/2016 PPS 677/11/2012(022861)

 
 
 
 
The world this week

Politics

America imposed sanctions
on 13 Venezuelan oﬃcials
ahead of a planned election to
a constituent assembly, which
will have the power to rewrite
Venezuela’s constitution. The
sanctions freeze the American
assets of the army chief, the
interior minister and the head
of the electoral commission
among others and bar Ameri-
can companies from doing
business with them. Critics of
the Venezuelan regime say it
will use the proposed constitu-
ent assembly to snuﬀ out
democracy. The opposition
called a 48-hour strike to prot-
est against it. 

A show of force

Chinese and Russian war-
ships staged a joint exercise in
the Baltic Sea, their ﬁrst togeth-
er in those waters. Their navies
have stepped up co-operation
in recent years. They have also
staged war games in the South
China Sea and the Mediterra-
nean. China wants to show
that its navy can operate far
aﬁeld; both countries also
share a resentment of Ameri-
can naval power. 

Hong Kong said that oﬃcials
from mainland China will
enforce immigration law
inside a new railway station in
the city that is due to open late
next year. The move was con-
demned by pro-democracy
campaigners, who fear it is a
further encroachment on the
territory’s autonomy. 

Martial law in Mindanao, the
second-largest island in the
Philippines, was extended
until the end of the year. The
army is battling insurgents
linked to Islamic State in the

city of Marawi. Meanwhile,
Rodrigo Duterte, the country’s
ﬁery president, said he was
calling oﬀ peace talks with
Maoist rebels. He has threat-
ened to launch air strikes at
schools that teach children
from the Lumad tribe. He said
the schools were a breeding
ground for communists. 

The Taliban claimed responsi-
bility for a bombing in Kabul in
which at least 31 people died.
The insurgents also killed
dozens of soldiers in an attack
on an army base near Kanda-
har. Over 1,600 civilians were
killed in Afghanistan in the
ﬁrst half of the year. 

Australia’s minister for
resources stepped down after
learning that he holds dual
nationality, which the constitu-
tion forbids for legislators.
Matthew Canavan said he had
no idea he was also an Italian
citizen: his mother registered
him in 2006. Two Green party
senators recently resigned
because they also hold dual
nationality. 

Honourable worship

Israel’s government tried to
diﬀuse tension over access to
the al-Aqsa mosque in Jerusa-
lem by removing metal-detec-
tors it had installed there. But
their replacement by high-tech
cameras is not likely to prove
acceptable to Palestinians.

The European Court of Justice
ruled that Hamas, an Islamist
group that runs the Gaza Strip,
should remain on the Euro-
pean Union’s terrorist list.

Libya’s two internal rivals, the
UN-backed prime minister in
the west and the military
commander of the east, met in
Paris and agreed to a ceaseﬁre.

Ntabo Ntaberi Sheka, a war-
lord accused of overseeing
mass rape in the Democratic
Republic of Congo, gave
himself up to UN peacekeep-
ers in the east of the country.

They’ll see you in court

Following a week of street
protests against planned
changes to the judiciary,
Poland’s president, Andrzej
Duda, vetoed two of three bills
seeking to limit the indepen-
dence of the courts. Despite
the veto, the European Com-
mission issued a formal warn-
ing, giving Poland one month
to address concerns over the
government’s eﬀorts to nobble
the judiciary. 

Sweden’s government faced a
political crisis following a data
breach at the transport agency.
Leaders from the centre-right
opposition called for a
no-conﬁdence vote against
three ministers from the ruling
Social Democratic Party.

The European Court of Jus-
tice’s adviser recommended
that it should dismiss a legal
case brought by Hungary and
Slovakia against refugee quo-
tas. The European Commis-
sion sent a formal request to
Poland, Hungary and the
Czech Republic to respect the
quotas, which aim to ease
pressure on Greece and Italy.

The EU rejected Turkey’s
request for new accession
talks. The EU has condemned
the Turkish government’s
security crackdown following
an attempted coup in July 2016.
A trial of 17 journalists on
terrorism-related charges and
the detention of Amnesty
International activists have
only fuelled tensions with
Brussels over human rights. 

The separation of power

The House of Representatives
voted by 419-3 to impose new
sanctions on Russia, Iran and
North Korea and to give Con-
gress the power to thwart any
attempt by the White House to
ease sanctions against Russia.
The bill now moves to the
Senate where it has a similar
level of support: enough to
override a veto by Mr Trump. 

The Economist July 29th 2017 5

At a closed-door meeting in the
Senate, Jared Kushner, Mr
Trump’s son-in-law, who is a
senior adviser to the president,
denied collusion between the
Trump campaign and Russian
oﬃcials. 

With much of Washington
consumed by the Republicans’
wrangling over a health-care
bill and amendments to pass a
“skinny” repeal of Obamacare,
Mr Trump took to Twitter to
announce a ban on trans-
gender people serving in the
armed forces.

After just six months in the job,
Sean Spicer quit as White
House press secretary in a
disagreement over Mr Trump’s
appointment of a new com-
munications director. Mr
Spicer’s tenure was a troubled
one. He had a feisty relation-
ship with the media from the
start, defending Mr Trump’s
exaggerated claims about the
size of his inauguration crowd.
But he was shut out of the
president’s inner circle; the
appointment of Anthony
Scaramucci, a ﬁnancier and
broadcaster known as “The
Mooch”, to the top communi-
cations job was the ﬁnal straw. 

A seminal study

Research led by American and
Israeli scientists suggested that
sperm counts among men in
rich countries have fallen by
around 50% in four decades.
Other studies have made
similar claims in the past, but
have been criticised for being
unreliable. The latest analysis
combines results from 185
other papers and strongly
suggests that the trend is real.
Scientists do not know what is
causing the decline: one candi-
date is hormone-disrupting
chemicals used widely in
industry.

1

supply in order to boost the
commodity’s price. OPEC and
Russia agreed to lower output
last year, but Ecuador recently
became the ﬁrst country to
renege on the pledge. Without
naming any country directly,
Saudi Arabia’s energy minister
vowed there would be no
more “free rides”. 

Infrastructure

Biggest cash shor tfalls in needed
investment, 2016-40 forecast, $trn
Projected spending
Shor tfall
0
10
30

20

China
United
States
India

Brazil

Russia

Source: Global Infrastructure Hub

A study by the Global Infra-
structure Hub, an organisation
backed by the G20, found that
$97trn is needed in global
infrastructure investment by
2040, but that there is an $18trn
shortfall between current
investment projections and
the spending that is required.
China will have the greatest
demand at $28trn, but America
has the biggest predicted short-
fall: $3.8trn. Poorer countries
have larger proportional in-
vestment gaps. Egypt, Nigeria
and South Africa, for example,
are forecast to meet only 69%
of their infrastructure needs.

The bullish mood in American
stockmarkets was unaﬀected
by the Federal Reserve’s
statement at its latest policy
meeting that it would start to
unwind the portfolio of assets
it accumulated during the
ﬁnancial crisis “relatively
soon”. The Fed left interest
rates on hold, but did nothing
to suggest it won’t raise rates
one more time before the end
of the year.

The IMF cut its forecast for
growth this year in America to
2.1% and in Britain to 1.7%. Right
on cue, oﬃcial ﬁgures showed
that Britain’s economy grew
by 1.7% in the second quarter
year on year. Languid growth
in the manufacturing and
construction industries was
oﬀset by a robust services
sector, notably the booming
ﬁlm-production industry. A
handful of recent blockbusters
have been wholly or partially
shot in Britain, including
“Beauty and the Beast”. 

The euro zone’s economy
was projected by the IMF to
grow slightly faster than it had
previously expected. It now
thinks the currency bloc’s GDP
will expand by 1.9% this year.
But in a separate report the
fund warned that the level of
public debt was still too high in
some countries and that gov-

The Economist July 29th 2017

ernments should do more to
“repair the pre-crisis erosion of
competitiveness”.

Greece sold its ﬁrst govern-
ment bonds on international
markets for three years. There
was heavy demand for the
ﬁve-year note, though half the
buyers had been oﬀered an
incentive to switch from bonds
that are due to pay out in 2019.
Still, the prime minister hailed
it as a big step towards ﬁnish-
ing the “unpleasant adven-
ture” of restrictive bail-outs. 

Britain’s Supreme Court ruled
that fees imposed on workers
who want to take their
employer to a tribunal are
unlawful. The fees were in-
troduced in 2013 by the govern-
ment to deter unscrupulous
claims. The number of cases
has plunged since then. The
court found people could not
aﬀord the fees. 

There’s a takeover afoot

Having put itself up for sale
after a run of bad results, Jim-
my Choo found a buyer. The
upscale British shoemaker is
being bought by Michael
Kors, an American fashion
house at the lower end of the
luxury market, for $1.2bn. 

Other economic data and news
can be found on pages 68-69

6 The world this week

Business

It was an eventful week for the
European car industry. The
British government an-
nounced that it would ban the
sale of new cars that run only
on diesel or petrol by 2040.
France made a similar pledge
recently. Meanwhile, BMW
said it would build its new
fully electric version of the
Mini in Britain. It had consid-
ered other sites in Europe.

A car cartel?

The European Commission
conﬁrmed it was looking into
allegations that German
carmakers colluded to reduce
the costs of parts and diesel
emission-treatment systems.
The commission was respond-
ing to a tip-oﬀ, and stressed
that it was “premature at this
stage to speculate”. 

GrabTaxi, a ride-hailing ﬁrm
based in Singapore and operat-
ing in seven countries, raised
$2.5bn to up its competition
with Uber. SoftBank, a Japa-
nese tech giant, and Didi Chu-
xing, a Chinese version of
Uber, provided most of the
ﬁnancing. It was the largest
fundraising round for a startup
in South-East Asia to date. 

Google’s parent company,
Alphabet, reported a 28% drop
in quarterly proﬁt as it ab-
sorbed the cost of the $2.7bn
ﬁne levied against Google by
the EU for anti-competitive
practices. Alphabet’s net in-
come for the second quarter
came in at $3.5bn; revenues
rose by a ﬁfth to $26bn.

Foxconn conﬁrmed that it is to
build a factory in Wisconsin,
its ﬁrst big investment in the
United States. The Taiwanese
contract electronics manufac-
turer assembles the iPhone
and other gadgets at its plants
in China and elsewhere. The
factory in Wisconsin will
produce LCD displays for cars,
smartphones and TVs.

At OPEC’s meeting in St Peters-
burg there were tough words,
but little action, directed at
member states lagging in their
commitment to reduce oil

Leaders

Venezuela’s agony

The Economist July 29th 2017 7

the constitution and parliament, free political prisoners and
guarantee that overdue regional elections, and the presiden-
tial contest next year, take place fairly. However, an attempt at
such a negotiation failed last year, and there is no sign that Mr
Maduro and his cronies will voluntarily surrender power.
Those who want to save Venezuela have limited inﬂuence,
but they are not helpless. The opposition, a variegated alliance
long on personal ambition and short of cohesion, needs to do
far more to become a credible alternative government. That in-
cludes agreeing on a single leader. Some in the opposition
think all that is needed to trigger the regime’s collapse is to
ramp up the protests. That looks fanciful. Mr Maduro can still
count on the army, with which he co-governs. In Venezuela’s
command economy he controls such money as there is, and re-
tains the backing of a quarter of Venezuelans—enough to put
his own people on the streets. And he has the advice of Cuba’s
security oﬃcials, who are experts in selective repression.

The country is sliding from economic catastrophe to dictatorship. What can be done to stop it?
VENEZUELA claims to have
more oil than Saudi Arabia,
yet its citizens are hungry. An as-
tonishing 93% of them say they
cannot aﬀord the food they
need, and three-quarters have
lost weight in the past year. The
regime that caused this prevent-
able tragedy professes great love for the poor. Yet its oﬃcials
have embezzled billions, making Venezuela the most corrupt
country in Latin America, as well as the most ineptly gov-
erned. It is a textbook example of why democracy matters:
people with bad governments should be able to throw the
bums out. That is perhaps why President Nicolás Maduro is so
eager to smother what little is left of democracy in Venezuela.
On July 30th, barring a last-minute change of mind, Mr
Maduro will hold a rigged election to rubber-stamp the cre-
ation of a hand-picked constituent assembly whose aim is to
perpetuate his unpopular state-socialist regime (see page 16). It
will complete the destruction of the powers of parliament,
now controlled by the opposition, and wreck the integrity of a
presidential election due next year, which, if it were free and
fair, Mr Maduro would surely lose. Opponents say the assem-
bly will install Cuban-style communism. At the very least, its
creation will provoke more violence in a country where the
streets are already choked with tear gas and littered with buck-
shot from police shotguns. In almost four months of protests,
more than 100 people have died; hundreds more have been
locked up for political reasons. All this infuriates Venezuelans.
It should alarm the outside world, too. 

Aim at the regime, not its victims
Latin America has at last woken up to the threat. Venezuela is
far more isolated than it was, having been suspended from the
Mercosur trade group. But it was able to avoid a similar suspen-
sion from the Organisation of American States (OAS) last
month with the backing of its ideological allies and some Ca-
ribbean island-states to which it oﬀers cheap oil. The United
States should have applied more diplomatic muscle to sway
the vote at the OAS. President Donald Trump is now consider-
ing broad sanctions such as barring the import of Venezuelan
oil, or banning American companies from working in Venezu-
ela’s oil industry. That would be a mistake: Mr Maduro would
ﬁnd new buyers for his oil within months. In the meantime, or-
dinary people would suﬀer more than the regime’s loyalists.
And broad sanctions might strengthen the regime, because Mr
Maduro’s empty claim that he faces “economic warfare” from
“imperial” America would at last have some substance.
More promisingly, on July 26th the Trump administration
announced individual sanctions on a further 13 Venezuelan of-
ﬁcials involved in the constituent assembly, or suspected of
corruption or abusing human rights. These oﬃcials have had
visas withdrawn, and American banks and ﬁrms are barred
from doing business with them. This eﬀort could be intensiﬁed
by pressing banks to disclose embarrassing information about
oﬃcials who have stashed stolen public funds abroad. The
European Union and Latin America should join this eﬀort. 
It will not, in itself, force the regime to change. But the stick
of individual sanctions should be combined with the oﬀer of
negotiations, brokered by foreign governments. Any ﬁnal deal
may have to include legal immunity for senior Venezuelan of-
ﬁcials. That is distasteful, but may be necessary to achieve a
peaceful transition back to democracy. 
The alternative could be a slide into generalised violence,
for which Mr Maduro would be squarely responsible. Already
there are signs of anarchy, with radicals on both sides slipping
loose from their leaders’ control. Rather than a second Cuba or
a tropical China, chavista Venezuela, with its corruption, gangs
and ineptitude, risks becoming something much worse. 7

The clueless caudillo of Caracas
By the end of this year Venezuela’s economic collapse since
2012 will be the steepest in modern Latin American history. In-
come per person is now back where it was in the 1950s. The
main cause of this calamity is ideological. Following the lead
of his late mentor, Hugo Chávez, Mr Maduro spends public
money lavishly, especially on his supporters. Weak oil prices
and inept management mean he cannot pay his bills. So he
prints money and blames speculators for the resulting inﬂa-
tion, which is expected to exceed 1,000% this year. The black-
market price for US dollars is now about 900 times the oﬃcial
rate. Price controls and the expropriation of private ﬁrms have
led to shortages of food and medicine. With hospitals bare of
supplies, the maternal mortality rate jumped by 66% last year.
Oﬃcials ﬂagrantly proﬁteer from their access to hard currency
and basic goods. Venezuela has become a favoured route for
drug-traﬃcking and is awash with arms.
Some left-wingers, such as Britain’s Jeremy Corbyn, imag-
ine that Venezuela’s “Bolivarian revolution” is a promising ex-
periment in social justice. Tell that to the tens of thousands of
Venezuelans who have ﬂed to neighbouring countries. As the
crisis worsens, their number will rise. That makes Venezuela’s
government a threat to the region as well as its own people.
What can be done? The best solution would be a negotiated
transition. Mr Maduro would ﬁnish his term but would respect

8 Leaders

China’s navy

The new gunboat diplomacy

The Economist July 29th 2017

na’s growing economic and military might almost as much as
their American counterparts do. Russia sells China a lot of
weapons, but sells similar stuﬀ to India, China’s rival. True, Mr
Xi ignores the West’s sanctions on Russia—but that is mainly
because he wants a stable relationship with a huge neighbour
which China has come close to ﬁghting in living memory.

China is extending its maritime power across the world—but that is not necessarily a bad thing
RARELY in times of peace has
a country acquired naval
power at such a rate as China
has in recent years. Three dec-
ades ago its warships were
clapped out, capable of operat-
ing only close to shore. Now its
shipyards are churning out state-
of-the-art combat vessels at a furious pace. Some experts be-
lieve it could have as many warships as America within a few
years. China’s navy is also developing global range: this week
three of its ships have been staging war games in the Baltic Sea
with the Russian navy, the ﬁrst joint exercises by the two coun-
tries in those waters. The intended message to the West is clear.
China and Russia, united in their resentment of American
power, are thumbing their noses at NATO on its doorstep.
China’s naval build-up worries American oﬃcials. Hardly
a week goes by without some new development that troubles
them. In April the country launched its ﬁrst domestically built
aircraft-carrier, and then in June its ﬁrst 10,000-tonne destroy-
er—similar in size to the ones America deploys in the region.
This month Chinese ships ﬁlled with troops sailed for Djibouti
to set up the country’s ﬁrst overseas military base. China’s na-
val build-up is giving it the wherewithal to seize and hold dis-
puted territory to which it lays claim in the East and South Chi-
na Seas, and to threaten Taiwan. In the event of a conﬂict,
America could be drawn in. This week’s exercises with Russia
in the Baltic, meanwhile, suggest not only a shared enmity to-
wards the West but also mutual admiration of each other’s
thuggish political systems. President Xi Jinping has turned a
blind eye to Russia’s land-grab in Ukraine, and President Vladi-
mir Putin to China’s in the South China Sea. 
Yet there is far less to the Russia-China relationship than
meets the eye (see page 23). Russian oﬃcials worry about Chi-

Exercising responsibility
As for China’s naval muscle-ﬂexing in the Baltic, that is a devel-
opment that should, in several respects, be welcomed rather
than feared. If China wants to show that its warships can oper-
ate in distant seas, there is nothing wrong with that. Indeed, it
is entirely right that China, as a global economic power, should
play a larger part in providing the maritime security on which
global trade depends. It is already taking part in anti-piracy op-
erations in the Gulf of Aden—something for which its base in
Djibouti will play a useful supporting role.
Deploying its navy far beyond its own waters might also
help China understand that America, too, has good reasons for
doing so. China frequently huﬀs about American warships in
the western Paciﬁc, refusing to accept one of the Pentagon’s
main reasons for deploying there: that America has a vital
stake in the security of Asian trade.
Rather than fretting about joint exercises like those taking
place this week, America should encourage China to partici-
pate in more of them, including the biennial multi-country
RIMPAC manoeuvres, to be held oﬀ Hawaii next year. In May
the Pentagon invited China to join in, for what would be the
third time. Some American politicians grumble about the in-
volvement of a navy so unfriendly to the West. But they are
wrong to do so. Such exercises are an important way to prevent
confrontation triggered by misunderstanding. And China’s in-
clusion would help ensure that its increasing naval assertive-
ness bolsters global security, rather than threatens it. 7

Trade deals

A special relationship with reality

Exports

US

*Excluding Br itain

40
60
80
to US 19%

100

other

Br itain

EU

2016, % of total
0
20

Britain and America suﬀer from similar delusions when it comes to trade
NO TWO countries are doing
more to strain the fabric of
modern trade than America and
Britain. President Donald Trump
wants to rewrite the terms of
America’s trade relationships
with everyone from Mexico to
South Korea. After its vote to
leave the European Union, Britain faces having to negotiate
fresh trade deals with both the EU and countries beyond. 
The pair’s tone on trade is diﬀerent: one wants to put “Amer-
ica First”, the other to create a “global Britain”. But both visions
are predicated on the idea of striking swift, bilateral deals, and

each has identiﬁed the other as the perfect partner. At a meet-
ing of G20 leaders this month, Mr Trump spoke of a “powerful
deal, great for both countries”, which would be done “very,
very quickly”. On July 24th Liam Fox, Britain’s international
trade secretary, met his American counterparts to start talks
about a post-Brexit agreement. A day later the president
tweeted his excitement: “Working on major Trade Deal with
the United Kingdom. Could be very big & exciting. JOBS!” 
An agreement between Britain and America would be a
good thing in principle. Tariﬀs are already pretty low, although
Mr Trump may have his eye on a 10% tariﬀ on cars imported
from America. But diﬀerences in rules and standards impede
the ﬂow of goods and services, worth $227bn in 2016, between 

Canada
EU*
Mexico

to Br itain 6%

other

1

The Economist July 29th 2017 

Leaders 9

2

the two countries. In practice, however, Mr Trump and, espe-
cially, the Brexiteers suﬀer from several profound delusions.
The ﬁrst concerns speed. Mr Trump’s desire to move fast is
all very well, but no deal can get done without the say-so of
Congress. The American legislature has already slowed him
down on plans to renegotiate the North American Free Trade
Agreement (NAFTA), and an agreement with Britain is not on
its agenda. Much more binding are the constraints on Britain—
its government is not legally allowed to sign anything until it
leaves the EU. Mr Fox can swan around the world as much as
he likes, but there can be no real negotiations with third coun-
tries before Britain has worked out such fundamental ques-
tions as whether it is part of a customs union with the EU.
Politics will also slow things down. Mr Trump seems to
have little understanding that other countries have voters; as a
slogan, “America First” tends to resonate less with non-Ameri-
cans. Brexiteers have been equally complacent about what the
British public is prepared to swallow to strike new deals. Mr
Fox spent much of this week fending oﬀ questions about
whether Britain would end its ban on chlorinated chicken in
order to satisfy America’s farmers. 
A second delusion common to both countries concerns the
value of bilateralism. The big barriers to trade are regulatory:
for EU-American trade as a whole, diﬀerences in rules on busi-
ness and ﬁnancial services have a trade-dampening eﬀect
equivalent to a tariﬀ of 30%. In general, the most eﬃcient way
to dismantle such barriers is by harmonising rules, not multi-

plying them. In some cases Britain will have to choose be-
tween freer trade with America and unimpeded access to Eu-
rope. If Britain were to deviate from EU norms in a deal with
America on genetically modiﬁed foods, for example, it would
risk tougher customs checks with Europe, including at the bor-
der with Ireland. More limited access to the EU would also di-
minish its appeal to America. Until Britain has settled on a new
regulatory relationship with the EU, what might seem like a bi-
lateral negotiation will in practice be a multilateral one. 

Don’t count your chlorinated chickens
Finally, both sides seem to have forgotten how much geogra-
phy matters to trade. The EU accounts for 44% of Britain’s ex-
ports, America for just 19%. Economists have estimated that a
hard Brexit would hammer exports to the EU by 25%. To oﬀset
this loss, those to America would need to rise by an improba-
ble 58%. Similarly, it would be bizarre for America to prioritise
Britain given the renegotiation of NAFTA. Mr Trump says of
Britain that “there is no country that could possibly be closer
than our countries”. American ﬁrms, whose supply chains
weave across Canada and Mexico, may beg to diﬀer.
Plenty of people in Britain and America understand all this,
of course. It suits Mr Trump and the Brexiteers to show that
they have choices of trade partner. But the inconvenient facts
are these: trade deals take time and have most impact when
they involve lots of countries or ones that are right next door. A
UK-US agreement is neither imminent nor a priority. 7

AI in China

Code red

State-controlled corporations are developing powerful artiﬁcial intelligence. That is worrying
IMAGINE the perfect environ-
ment for developing artiﬁcial
intelligence (AI). The ingredients
would include masses of pro-
cessing power, lots of computer-
science boﬃns, a torrent of
capital—and abundant
data
with which to train machines to
recognise and respond to patterns. That environment might
sound like a fair description of America, the current leader in
the ﬁeld. But in some respects it is truer still of China.
The country is rapidly building up its cloud-computing
capacity. For sheer volume of research on AI, if not quality, Chi-
nese academics surpass their American peers; AI-related pat-
ent submissions in China almost tripled between 2010 and
2014 compared with the previous ﬁve years. Chinese startups
are attracting billions in venture capital. Above all, China has
over 700m smartphone users, more than any other country.
They are consuming digital services, using voice assistants,
paying for stuﬀ with a wave of their phones—and all the while
generating vast quantities of data. That gives local ﬁrms such
as Alibaba, Baidu and Tencent the opportunity to concoct best-
in-class AI systems for everything from facial recognition to
messaging bots. The government in Beijing is convinced of the
potential. On July 20th it outlined a development strategy de-
signed to make China the world’s leading AI power by 2030. 
An AI boom in the world’s most populous place holds out

enormous promise. No other country could generate such a
volume of data to enable machines to learn patterns indicative
of rare diseases, for example. The development of new tech-
nologies ought to happen faster, too. Because typing Chinese
characters is ﬁddly, voice-recognition services are more popu-
lar than in the West; they should improve faster as a result. Sys-
tems to adjust traﬃc lights automatically in response to foot-
age from roadside cameras are already being tested. According
to the McKinsey Global Institute, a research arm of the consul-
tancy, AI-driven automation could boost China’s GDP growth
by more than a percentage point annually. 
Yet the country’s AI plans also give cause for concern. One
worry is that the beneﬁts of Chinese breakthroughs will be
muted by data protectionism. A cyber-security law that came
into force in June requires foreign ﬁrms to store data they col-
lect on Chinese customers within the country’s borders; out-
siders cannot use Chinese data to oﬀer services to third parties.
It is not hard to imagine tit-for-tat constraints on Chinese ﬁrms.
And if data cannot be pooled, the algorithms that run autono-
mous cars and other products may not be the most eﬃcient. 
A second area of unease is ethics and safety. In America, the
technology giants of Silicon Valley have pledged to work to-
gether to make sure that any AI tools they develop are safe.
They will look at techniques like “boxing”, in which AI agents
are isolated from their environment so that any wayward be-
haviour does not have disastrous eﬀects. All the leading AI re-
searchers in the West are signatories to an open letter from 2015

1

10 Leaders

The Economist July 29th 2017

2

calling for a ban on the creation of autonomous weapons. If it
happens at all, the equivalent Chinese discussion about the
limits of ethical AI research is far more opaque. 
Chinese AI companies do have incentives to think about
some of these issues: rogue AI would be a problem for the
planet wherever it emerged. There is a self-interested case for
the formulation of global safety standards, for example. But a
third concern—that AI will be used principally to the beneﬁt of
China’s government—is a less tractable problem. 

Autocratic intelligence
The new plan is open about AI’s value to the state. It envisages
the use of the technology in everything from guided missiles
to predictive policing. AI techniques are perfect for ﬁnding pat-
terns in the massive amounts of data that Chinese censors
must handle in order to maintain a grip on the citizenry. It is

easy to imagine how the same data could boost the country’s
nascent plans to create a “social-credit” system that scores peo-
ple for their behaviour. Once perfected, these algorithms
would interest autocratic regimes around the world. China’s
tech ﬁrms are in no position to prevent the government in Bei-
jing from taking advantage of such tools. Baidu, for example,
has been appointed to lead a national laboratory for deep
learning. Chinese AI will reﬂect the inﬂuence of the state.
Western ﬁrms and governments are no angels when it
comes to data collection and espionage. But Western compa-
nies are at least engaged in an open debate about the ethical
implications of AI; and intelligence agencies are constrained
by democratic institutions. Neither is true of China. AI is a tech-
nology with the potential to change the lives of billions. If Chi-
na ends up having most inﬂuence over its future, then the state,
not citizens, may be the biggest beneﬁciary. 7

Demography

In defence of the childless

1900

20

40

60 72

Germany

United States

30

20

10

0

England &
Wales

Sweden
Spain

As % of total, by year of bir th

Childless women

More and more Westerners have no oﬀspring. They should not be criticised for it
ONE by one, prejudices are
tumbling in the West. Peo-
ple may harbour private suspi-
cions that other people’s race,
sex or sexuality makes them in-
ferior—but to say so openly is
utterly taboo. As most kinds of
prejudiced talk become the pre-
serve of anonymous social-media ranters, though, one old
strain remains respectable. Just ask a childless person.
They are not subject to special taxes, as they were in Soviet
Russia; nor are they driven from their homes, as they still are in
some poor countries. The childless nonetheless come in for a
lot of criticism. “Not to have children is a selﬁsh choice,” Pope
Francis has intoned, perhaps forgetting what the Bible says
about motes and eyes. Others point out that non-parents are
failing to produce the future workers who will pay for their
pensions. Childless politicians are charged with not having a
proper stake in society. “He talks to us about the future, but he
doesn’t have children!” complained Jean-Marie Le Pen, co-
founder of the National Front party, of Emmanuel Macron,
who went on to win the French presidency. Similar attacks on
Theresa May and Angela Merkel also failed—but researchers
ﬁnd that many voters quietly agree. 
The charges against the childless should be thrown out,
along with other social calumnies. In many rich countries, be-
tween 15% and 20% of women, and a slightly higher proportion
of men, will not have children. The share is rising (see page 46).
Some have medical problems; others do not meet the right per-
son in time; still others decide they do not want them. Falling
sperm counts in rich countries may play a role, too. Whatever
the cause, the attacks on the childless are baseless. 
If non-breeders are selﬁsh, they have an odd way of show-
ing it. They are more likely to set up charitable foundations
than people with children, and much more likely to bequeath
money to good causes. According to one American estimate,
the mere fact of not having children raises the amount a per-
son leaves to charity by a little over $10,000. The childless are

thus a small but useful counterweight to the world’s parents,
who perpetuate social immobility by passing on their social
and economic advantages to their children. 
The fact that so many senior politicians lack oﬀspring ought
to put to rest the notion that they do not care for society. Five of
the G7 countries are led by childless men and women. Mr Mac-
ron, Mrs May, Mrs Merkel, Shinzo Abe and Paolo Gentiloni
have their faults, but they are not notably less able than Justin
Trudeau (who has three children) let alone Donald Trump
(who has ﬁve). Their opportunities for nepotism are limited.
And they spare their countries the spectacle of dynastic poli-
tics, which can lead to mediocrity. The BJP in India has a
brighter future because Narendra Modi is childless; for proof,
look at what has happened to the Congress party.

No kidding
The charge that childless people fail to pull their weight demo-
graphically is correct, but is less damning than it appears.
Those who do not have children do put pressure on public
pension systems. Faced with a deteriorating ratio of workers to
pensioners, governments have to do unpopular things like
making pensions less generous, as Japan has done, or accept-
ing more immigrants, as some Western countries have done. 
But to sustain public pensions in the long term, countries do
not actually need more parents. What they need instead is
more babies. It is possible to combine a high rate of childless-
ness with a high birth rate, provided people who become par-
ents have more than one or two children. That was the pattern
in many Western countries a century ago. Ireland, yet another
country with a childless leader, still manages it today.
The childless also do everyone else a favour by creating
wonderful works of art. British novelists have been especially
likely to have no progeny: think of Hilary Mantel, P.G. Wode-
house and the Brontë sisters. In September Britain will put
Jane Austen on its ten-pound note. That decision has been con-
troversial, though it is hard to see why. Few people have writ-
ten as shrewdly about money or about families—even though
Austen did not marry, and had no children. 7

Geneva, Paris, Berlin, New-York, Miami, Mexico, Tokyo, Taipei, Manila,
Hong-Kong, Beijing, Singapore, Bangkok, Dubaï, Doha, Kuwait, Riyadh 
www.charriol.com
www.facebook.com/CharriolOfficial

12

Letters

The German problem

Regarding your argument that
Germany’s current-account
surplus is damaging the world
economy (“Vorsprung durch
Angst”, July 8th), we should
explore multilateral ways to
put pressure on surplus coun-
tries to reduce their surpluses,
so that not all the adjustment
pressure falls on the deﬁcit
countries. It is much easier for
surplus countries to spend
down their surpluses (such as
by importing more) than for
deﬁcit countries to squeeze the
living conditions of their pop-
ulations suﬃciently to cut their
deﬁcits without the boost that
would come from selling more
to the surplus countries.
This is hardly a new idea.
The British delegation at the
Bretton Woods conference in
1944 proposed an “internation-
al clearing union”, in which
symmetrical adjustment
pressure could be applied,
such as interest charges on
countries’ surpluses. America,
which had a large surplus at
the time, rejected it out of
hand. The European Payments
Union, from 1950 to 1958, put
the international clearing-
house idea into practice,
though without the added
function of encouraging sur-
plus countries to cut their
surpluses. Today we can draw
inspiration from the earlier
experience and start to explore
a multilateral mechanism for
applying more symmetrical
pressure on surplus and deﬁcit
countries. The idea is not
pie-in-the-sky.

ROBERT WADE

Professor of global political
economy
London School of Economics

You start from the assumption
that the rest of the world
would beneﬁt if Germany
were to spend more. This
holds true only in a world
which is demand constrained.
But this is less and less the case
since the global output gap has
already fallen below 0.5% of
potential output and is project-
ed to disappear within a year
or two. You also acknowledge
that a number of smaller
northern European countries
run large surpluses as well.

The sum of the surpluses of
these countries is actually
about $230bn, similar to that
of Germany, so they do as
much damage as Germany.
Their surpluses hold a wider
lesson: the attempt to pin
underspending on some “Ger-
manic” features is misleading.
The current-account num-
bers have to be taken with a
pinch of salt. Mother Earth is
running a current account of
about $300bn with the rest of
the universe. In judging the
German surplus one should
keep in mind that within the
EU, and especially within the
euro area, international trans-
actions can no longer be mea-
sured with precision.

DANIEL GROS

Director
Centre for European Policy
Studies
Brussels

What is wrong with a
balanced budget when the
economy is expanding nicely?
Isn’t that exactly what John
Maynard Keynes would have
recommended? Germany
could usefully spend more on
infrastructure, the digital econ-
omy, defence, and child and
nursing care. However, Berlin
is already doing this. 
Stepping up such spending
gradually over years rather
than in a sudden surge has two
advantages. First, it doesn’t
bust the budget, as it can be
ﬁnanced by rising tax receipts
from strong gains in employ-
ment. Second, the money is
more likely to be spent well if
projects are examined on their
merit, instead of being
approved simply because the
extra outlays would help to
attain the ﬁscal deﬁcit that The
Economist deems so dearly
desirable.

HOLGER SCHMIEDING

Chief economist
Berenberg
London

This is not the ﬁrst time such
imbalances have caused trou-
ble in Europe. In the decade
after the ﬁrst world war, France
eventually rejoined the gold
standard, but with the franc at
an artiﬁcially low peg. Its
suppressed exchange rate
should have been a temporary

problem since convention
dictated that higher exports
would lead to gold inﬂows and
thus inﬂation (internal
adjustment). However, France
sterilised these inﬂows and its
share of the world’s gold
reserves swelled from 7% in
1927 to 32% in 1932 without any
increase in its price level. 
Germany’s excess savings
could be seen as a similar
sterilisation. In the case of the
1920s, France was widely
blamed for contributing to the
Depression by exporting deﬂa-
tion to those countries sharing
gold as currency. Its neighbour
should take note.

HALLAM DIXON

Bedrock Asset Management
London

In terms of gross pay (not net)
the OECD has found that Ger-
many is only second to Bel-
gium in taxing wages: 49% of
German wage income goes to
income tax and social security.
With the government running
ﬁscal surpluses and increasing-
ly spending tax money on
social transfers instead of
investments, the obvious and
fast solutions are signiﬁcant
tax cuts, both on income and
consumption, and changes to
an outdated pension system. 

ULRICH VOSS

Kronberg, Germany

The structural features of
Germany’s labour market are
vastly distorted. Although real
hourly wages have risen slight-
ly, the growing share of atyp-
ical employment, especially at
the bottom end of the labour
market, is partially oﬀsetting
this gain. The importance of
collective bargaining is dimin-
ishing, as fewer workers partic-
ipate and the number of
households living at or below
the poverty threshold has
reached an all-time high.

The Economist July 29th 2017

Furthermore, the productivity-
pay gap is ever widening.
Waiting for an automatic
stabilising mechanism to gain
traction might prove prohibi-
tively costly. Swift and decisive
action is what economic sanity
demands. 

CARSTEN SCHNEIDER, MdB

Responsible for budget, ﬁnance
and euro policy in the Social
Democratic Par ty (SPD)
Berlin

The largest, long-term structur-
al driver of Germany’s contin-
ued trade surplus and prosper-
ity is the euro. As long as
Germany continues to have an
artiﬁcially low exchange rate it
will never again be the “poor
man” of Europe. 

GREGORY ALEXANDER MARKS

New York

The surpluses you identify
coincide with the advent of
the euro, which undervalues
the German currency by some
40%. This undermines the
whole European project. How
long will the rest of Europe
tolerate the beneﬁts of the euro
going mainly to Germany? 

GUY HALLOWES

Sydney

There is also an emotional
aspect attached to German
exports. Germans tend to see
their leading role in trade as a
source of national pride.

MARTIN HOCK

Dresden, Germany

Germany has 1% of the world’s
population and produces 3% of
the world’s PPP GDP. Its
current-account surplus is less
than 0.5% of world GDP. Is that
truly “damaging”? Germans,
like the Swiss and the Dutch,
prefer to invest abroad where
they expect better returns. The
Economist traditionally has
favoured open markets and
the free movement of capital.
No longer? 

G.H. KETELS

Munich 7

Letters are welcome and should be
addressed to the Editor at 
The Economist, 25 St James’s Street,

London sw1A 1hg

E-mail: letters@economist.com
More letters are available at:

Economist.com/letters

Executive Focus

13

AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK GROUP
GROUPE DE LA B A N Q U E AFR ICA INE 
DE DÉVELOPPEMENT

Senior Director, Africa Investment Forum

Location: Côte d’Ivoire
Closing date: 6 August 2017

THE POSITION:
The Africa Investment Forum is a meeting place between international investors 
interested in Africa, African investors, both institutional and corporates with 
concrete investment objectives, Development Financial Institutions and selected 
government leaders to work out ways to boost private sector investments in Africa.

Among other responsibilities, the Senior Director, Africa Investment Forum will:
1. Drive and suppor t the inception and rollout of the Africa Investment Forums.
2. Direct a small direct-repor t team with core responsibility for attracting 
investments through the Africa Investment Forum.
3. Work with all complexes and teams across the Bank to nur ture and 
actualize their plans to attract investment and project funding as needed, 
and develop a robust project pipeline across all sectors.
4. Work with par tner organizations such as development banks and bilateral 
aid agencies to develop a joint platform to developing a robust project 
pipeline across all their sectors and attracting investments in Africa.
5. Develop the Africa Investment Forum’ investment Tracker and related key 
analysis on investment fl ows in Africa in collaboration with the private sector 
investment depar tments.
6. Build an unparalleled database on private investment plans and fl ows in 
Africa, with a par ticular focus on the Africa Investment Forum Deal Tracker, 
and to then use that information to foster positive change.
7. Identify a list of investment oppor tunities in Africa focused on private and 
Public-Private Par tnership projects.

To apply, please visit:
www.surveygizmo.com/s3/3704976/Senior-Director-Africa-Investment-Forum-EL4

The Economist July 29th 2017

14

Executive Focus

The Economist July 29th 2017

Property

15

The Economist July 29th 2017

16

Br ieﬁng Venezuela

The Economist July 29th 2017

The mess tropical Marxism makes

C A R A C A S

Nicolás Maduro’s attempt to impose dictatorship could end bloodily
IT COULD almost be a piece of contempo-
Mr Maduro claims that the assembly is
rary art, rather than a tool of political
the “only way to achieve peace”, to pro-
struggle. Overlooked by a mango tree
vide Venezuelans with social welfare and
heavy with blushing fruit, a rope is strung
to defend the country against what he
across Avenida Sucre as it climbs through a
claims is an “economic war” launched by
comfortable middle-class area towards the
America (though he provides no evidence
forested slopes of Monte Ávila overlook-
of this). “What they are trying to do is to in-
ing Caracas. Arranged beneath it are two
stall the Cuban model in this country,” re-
distressed wooden beams, two pallets
torts Ms Viso. “We will all be screwed even
placed vertically, a wheel hub, a rusting
if we take to the streets. There won’t be
metal housing for an electric transformer
private property, my business will go to the
and several tree branches. They form a
state.” The long battle over power and poli-
ﬂimsy barricade watched over by a couple
cy in Venezuela that began when Hugo
of dozen local residents.
Chávez was elected president in 1998 has
Why are they blockading their own
reached a critical point. Both government
street? “Because we want this government
and opposition believe that they are ﬁght-
to go,” explained María Antonieta Viso, the
ing for survival against a backdrop of a fail-
owner of a catering ﬁrm. They were taking
ing economy, rising hunger and anarchy.
part in a 24-hour “civic strike” on July 20th,
Chávez, a former army oﬃcer, pro-
called by the opposition coalition, Demo-
claimed a “Bolivarian revolution”, named
cratic Unity (MUD, from its initials in Span-
for Simón Bolívar, South America’s Vene-
ish). Down the hill, across innumerable
zuelan-born independence hero. He, too,
such roadblocks, the sting of tear gas sig-
summoned a constituent assembly, which
nalled clashes between demonstrators
drew up a new constitution and which he
and the National Guard, a militarised po-
used to take control of the judiciary and
lice force. The strike, repeated this week,
the electoral authority. For much of his 14
was part of “Zero Hour”—a campaign of
years in power he had the support of most
civil disobedience aimed at blocking a
Venezuelans, thanks partly to his charis-
plan by Nicolás Maduro, Venezuela’s presi-
matic claim to represent a downtrodden
dent, to install a constituent assembly with
majority and to the ﬂaws of an opposition
absolute powers.
identiﬁed with an uncaring elite. But

above all the soaring price of oil gave him
an unprecedented windfall, some of
which he showered on social programmes
in the long-neglected ranchos (shanty-
towns). A consumption boom, magniﬁed
by an overvalued currency, kept the mid-
dle class quiescent. He governed at ﬁrst
through a broad coalition of army oﬃcers,
far-left politicians and intellectuals.
Angered by opposition attempts to un-
seat him and inﬂuenced by Fidel Castro,
Chávez pushed Venezuela towards state
socialism after 2007. Economic distortions
accumulated, along with corruption and
debt. Before he died of cancer in 2013, Chá-
vez chose Mr Maduro, a former bus driver
and pro-Cuban activist, as his successor. 

From Chávez to Maduro
Mr Maduro, however, lacks Chávez’s polit-
ical skills and popular support. And he has
had to grapple with the plunge in the oil
price. Years of controls and the takeover of
more than 1,500 private businesses and
many farms mean that Venezuela now
produces little except oil, and imports al-
most everything else. The government is
desperate to avoid defaulting on its debt,
since that would lead to creditors seizing
oil shipments and assets abroad. 
Rather than reform the economy, Mr
Maduro has simply squeezed it, applying a
tourniquet to imports (see chart 1 on next
page). The government has no clear strat-
egy for external ﬁnancing, and the ﬁscal
deﬁcit, mainly ﬁnanced by printing mon-
ey, is out of control, says Efraín Velázquez,
the president of the National Economic
Council, a quasi-oﬃcial body. The result:
“you can’t have growth and will have a lot 

1

The Economist July 29th 2017

2 of inﬂation.” Between 2013 and the end of
this year, GDP will have contracted by
more than 35% (see chart 2). What this
means for most Venezuelans is penury.
Near Plaza Pérez Bonalde, a leafy en-
clave in the gritty district of Catia in west-
ern Caracas, 100 or so people, mainly
women, queue up outside a bakery. They
hope to get a ration of eight bread rolls for
the subsidised price of 1,200 bolívares (less
than $0.15 at the black-market exchange
rate). “At
least
it’s something, because
everything else is so expensive now,” says
Sol Ciré, a mother of two. She is unem-
ployed, having lost her job at a defunct gov-
ernment hypermarket. Her fate stems from
a change of government strategy.
Generalised price controls had generat-
ed widespread shortages and embarrass-
ingly long queues. Instead, the govern-
ment has put the army in charge of a
subsidised 
food-distribution 
system,
known as CLAP and modelled on Cuba’s
ration book. Up to 30% of families get this
dole of staple products regularly, reckons
Asdrúbal Oliveros of Ecoanalítica, an eco-
nomic consultancy. They are chosen not
according to need but according to their po-
litical importance to the government. 

On the breadline
At the same time, the government has re-
laxed price controls (bread is an exception).
In Catia’s main market, which spills into
the surrounding streets, food is abundant,
but pricey. A chicken costs 7,600 bolívares
and bananas 1,200 a kilo. Most people
don’t have dollars to change on the black
market: they must live on the minimum
wage of 250,000 bolívares. The result is
that four out of ﬁve households were poor
last year, their income insuﬃcient to cover
basic needs, according to a survey by three
universities. Medicines remain scarce.
Walk down many streets in Caracas and
you may be approached by a beggar.
All this has taken a heavy toll on the
government’s support. Mr Maduro won
only 50.6% of the vote in a presidential
election in 2013, a result questioned by his
opponent, Henrique Capriles. In a parlia-
mentary election in December 2015 the op-
position won a two-thirds majority—
enough to censure ministers and change
the constitution. 
In the government’s eyes, the opposi-
tion is bent on overthrowing an elected
president—the aim of protests in 2014, after
which Leopoldo López, an opposition
leader, was jailed on trumped-up charges.
In response, it has resorted to legal chica-
nery. If Chávez often violated the letter of
his own constitution, Mr Maduro tore it up.
Before the new parliament took over,
the government used the old one to pre-
serve its control of the supreme court by re-
placing justices due to retire. The court
then unseated three legislators, eliminat-
ing the opposition’s two-thirds majority.

Not deliver ing the goods

1

Venezuela, $bn

Impor ts
10

8

6

4

2

0

International reser ves,
including gold
50

Nicolás Maduro
becomes president

40

30

20

10

0

2008 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17

Sources: Central bank; IMF

Mr Maduro has ruled by decree. The tame
electoral tribunal quashed an opposition
attempt to trigger a referendum to recall
the president—a device Chávez put in the
constitution. It postponed regional elec-
tions due to take place last December. 
In March the court issued decrees strip-
ping the parliament of all powers. That
seemed to be because foreign investors
take more seriously than the government a
constitutional provision under which only
the parliament can approve foreign loans.
Although partially withdrawn, the decrees
were the trigger for a confrontation that
continues. They opened up fractures in
chavismo—notably the public opposition
of Luisa Ortega, the attorney-general since
2007 (who had jailed Mr López). Mr Madu-
ro’s announcement on May 1st that he
would convene the constituent assembly
intensiﬁed both trends.
Chávez’s constitution was drawn up by
a democratically elected constituent as-
sembly, convoked by referendum. Mr Ma-
duro is following a script from Mussolini.
He has called the assembly by decree. It
will have a “citizen, worker, communal
and peasant-farmer” character, he said.
What this means is that 181 members will
be chosen by government-controlled “sec-
toral” groups such as students, ﬁshermen
and unions. Another 364 members will be
directly elected, but in gerrymandered
fashion: each of Venezuela’s 340 munici-
palities will choose one. Small towns are
under the government’s thumb; cities,
where the opposition is a majority, will get
only one extra representative. 
Datanálisis, a reliable pollster, ﬁnds that
two-thirds of respondents reject the con-
stituent assembly, more than 80% think it
unnecessary to change the constitution
and only 23% approve of Mr Maduro. At
just two weeks’ notice, on July 16th almost
7.5m Venezuelans turned out for an unoﬃ-
cial plebiscite organised by the opposition.
Almost all of them voted to reject the as-
sembly, to call on the army to defend the
constitution and for a presidential election
by next year (when one is due).
Few doubt that the assembly will be a
puppet-body and the vote on July 30th,

Br ieﬁng Venezuela 17

which the opposition will boycott, will be
inﬂated. The government counts on the
4.5m people who are employed in the pub-
lic sector or in communal bodies. Those
who fail to turn out risk losing not just their
job but their CLAP food rations. Additional
pressure to vote in chavista neighbour-
hoods comes from the colectivos—regime-
sponsored armed thugs on motorbikes. Of-
ﬁcials have said the assembly will not only
write a new constitution but will assume
supreme power, sacking Ms Ortega and re-
placing the parliament, whose building it
will occupy. It will give Mr Maduro a slight-
ly larger ﬁgleaf than the supreme court for
a dictatorship of the minority. 
Yet the president will ﬁnd it hard to
make this stick. “How do you govern the
country with 75% against you?” asks Mr
Capriles. “I think he’s trapped.” For the
past four months the opposition has held
almost daily protests. These have a ritual
quality. To prevent demonstrators reaching
the city centre, or blocking the main motor-
way through Caracas, the National Guard
ﬁres volleys of tear gas, buckshot—and oc-
casionally bullets. Younger
radicals,
known as the “Resistance”, press forward,
throwing stones from behind makeshift
shields. Similar scenes take place across
the country. Looting is commonplace. In
these clashes, over 100 people have died.
More than 400 protesters are now prison-
ers, including several opposition politi-
cians. After the parliament named 33 jus-
tices to a rival supreme court on July 21st,
the government arrested three of them. 

Resistance isn’t futile
Mr Maduro has more worries. The ﬁrst is
his own side. Chavista strongholds are wa-
vering. In the bread queue in Catia, several
people say they are against the assembly.
The opposition managed to set up voting
stations for its plebiscite there: at one, a
woman died when a colectivo ﬁred on vot-
ers. “Some people have left us and gone
over to the other side,” admits a local oﬃ-
cial. “But it’s very diﬃcult for a chavista to
support the opposition,” she adds. Chávez
is still viewed favourably by 53% of Vene-
zuelans, according to Datanálisis.

1

Contractual diff iculties

Venezuela, GDP, % change on a year earlier

2

Nicolás Maduro
becomes president

Forecast

Ecoanalítica estimate

10

5

+

0

–

5

10

15

20

2008 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17

Sources: Central bank; Ecoanalítica; Haver Analytics

18 Br ieﬁng Venezuela

2

Rather, a new movement of “critical” or
“democratic” chavistas, including Ms Orte-
ga, several former ministers and recently
retired generals, has publicly called for the
scrapping of the assembly and the uphold-
ing of the constitution. When they held a
press conference at a modest hotel on July
21st, some 300 regime supporters outside
tried to drown them out with loud music
and chants of “traitors”.
Then there is the army. The regime has
co-opted it, turning it into a faction-ridden,
politicised and top-heavy moneymaking
operation, with more than 2,000 generals
(where 200 used to suﬃce). Mr Maduro has
given them control over food imports and
distribution, ports and airports, a bank and
the mining industry. Many generals have
grown rich by buying dollars at the lowest
oﬃcial exchange rate of $1=10 bolívares, in-
tended for food imports, and selling them
at the black market rate of 9,000. Others
smuggle petrol or drugs.

Murmuring in the ranks
An “undercurrent of muttering” among ju-
nior oﬃcers is checked by a network of po-
litical commissars and snoops installed by
Chávez, says José Machillanda, of Simón
Bolívar University in Caracas. At the top,
several thousand Cuban security person-
nel guard Mr Maduro and the 30-40 lead-
ers who form the regime’s core.
But the assembly has tested the army’s
loyalty to Mr Maduro. He twice reshuﬄed
senior ranks in the past two months. Cara-
cas is alive with rumours of an impending
pronunciamento, in which the army with-
draws its support for the regime.
Another acute threat to Mr Maduro is
the economy. The rot has spread to the oil
industry, Venezuela’s mainstay. According
to OPEC, since 2015 the country’s oil output
has fallen by 400,000 barrels per day (or
around 17%). This is the long-term price of
Chávez’s decision to turn PDVSA, the once
eﬃcient state oil company, into an arm of
the welfare state. 
Foreign-exchange 
reserves
hover
around $10bn, according to the Central
Bank. Economists expect the government
to make $3.5bn in debt payments due in the
autumn, but it will struggle to ﬁnd the
$8.5bn it needs to avoid default next year.
China, a big paymaster, is reluctant to lend
more. Russia may be Mr Maduro’s best
hope, but it worries about getting entan-
gled 
in possible American sanctions
against Venezuela.
The fourth problem Mr Maduro faces is
that the region has become less friendly to
him. Chávez enjoyed the solidarity of oth-
er left-wing governments in Latin America.
Many are no longer there, or have dis-
tanced themselves. Venezuela has been
suspended from Mercosur, a trade group; it
could be expelled if the assembly goes
ahead, says Argentina’s foreign minister.
The regime showed that it cares about its

Unaffordable

Venezuela 
Monthly minimum wage

3

Consumer pr ices

% change on a year earlier

Forecast

1,200

$*

200

150

100

50

0

Nicolás Maduro
becomes president

Ecoanalítica
estimate 

900

600

300

0

2011 12

13

14

15

16 17

Sources: Venezuela Of f icial
Gazette; DolarToday;
Central bank; Ecoanalítica

*Excluding food bond,
at free-market exchange rate

standing in the region by the big dip-
lomatic eﬀort it made in June to prevent its
suspension from the Organisation of
American States. 
Many in Caracas assumed that Mr Ma-
duro intended the assembly as a bargain-
ing chip, to be withdrawn in return for con-
cessions by the opposition. If so, he may be
trapped by the forces of radicalisation he
has unleashed. Diosdado Cabello, a retired
army oﬃcer who is his chief rival within
the regime, appears to see the assembly as
his route to power. Back down now, and
Mr Maduro risks losing face among his
hard-core supporters. 
Venezuela thus stands at a junction.
One road involves a negotiation that might
either ﬁx a calendar for a free and fair elec-
tion, or that might see Mr Maduro and oth-
er regime leaders depart. The opposition is
mistrustful after talks brokered by the Vati-
can and José Luis Rodríguez Zapatero, a for-
mer Spanish prime minister, broke down
last year when it quickly became clear that
the government was not prepared to re-
store constitutional rule. Mr Zapatero was
a conduit for a move that saw Mr López

Can anyone stop Mr Maduro?

The Economist July 29th 2017

transferred from prison to house arrest this
month. He is in Caracas again this week. 
The city hums with rumours of a new
mediation eﬀort led by a shifting kaleido-
scope of foreign governments. But condi-
tions do not yet seem ripe. “The govern-
ment sees the cost of leaving power as very
high, that they would be destroyed and
persecuted,” reckons Luis Vicente León of
Datanálisis. The opposition is suspicious,
too. “To return to political negotiations we
have to have real signs that the govern-
ment is prepared to change,” observes
Freddy Guevara, the deputy leader of Mr
López’s party.
That probably requires a military pro-
nunciamento. But the army “looks at the
opposition and doesn’t see any guarantees
that they would be able to run the coun-
try”, says a foreign diplomat. The MUD has
worked well as an electoral coalition, and
its plebiscite was impressive. It has pub-
lished a programme for a government of
national unity. But, crucially, it lacks an
agreed leader with a mandate to negotiate.
“The opposition is stuck together with
chewing gum,” says Mr León.

Anomie and anarchy
Barring a negotiation, the other route looks
bleak. There is a growing sense of anomie
and anarchy. On the opposition side, there
is desperation in the self-barricading of its
own neighbourhoods, an action which
does little to hurt the government. Social
media have been vital in undermining the
regime’s control of information. But they
also spread rumours and undermine mod-
eration. Middle-class caraqueños are read-
ing books on non-violent resistance. But on
the streets many protesters express mis-
trust for the MUD. The “Resistance” is well-
organised and trained. It would not be
hard for it to take up arms.
For its part, the chavista block is splinter-
ing. The National Guard now raids proper-
ties in chavista areas at night, because they
are being ﬁred on by disgruntled residents.
“There’s a growing attitude of ‘don’t mess
with me’,” says Mr Machillanda.
Mr Maduro and his core of civilian left-
ists admire Cuba but they do not com-
mand a disciplined revolutionary state, ca-
pable of
imposing
its will across
Venezuela’s vast territory. The 100 or so
dead in the protests are fewer than are
killed each weekend in lawless poor neigh-
bourhoods. The “Bolivarian revolution”
has created a state run by rival maﬁas and
undermined from within by corruption.
“They could try to Cubanise the coun-
try,” says Mr Capriles. “But whether Vene-
zuelans accept that is another matter.” Giv-
en 
the 
intensity
of
Venezuela’s
confrontation, it has suﬀered remarkably
little political violence. Sadly, that may
now change. If Mr Maduro shuts down all
hope of political change, it may take many
more deaths to break the deadlock. 7

Asia

The Economist July 29th 2017 19

Also in this section
20 Shinzo Abe’s popular ity plummets
20 A labour row in the Philippines
21 The stor y of South Korean wigs
22 Banyan: Memor ies are revived of a
Himalayan war

Indian infrastructure

Powering ahead

D E L H I

A few years ago India’s transport infrastructure was shoddy. Much has changed
JUST after 1pm on July 31st 2012 lights
the centre by the thinnest of infrastructure
blinked out across northern India. It was
threads. Snows blocked passage to Kash-
the world’s biggest-ever blackout, aﬀect-
mir for days at a time in winter; ﬂoods reg-
ing more than 600m people. It was also a
ularly cut oﬀ much of the north-east.
swingeing blow to a transport system that
That is changing, too. In recent months
had struggled to cope at the best of times.
Narendra Modi, the prime minister, has in-
Hundreds of trains came to a halt in open
augurated India’s longest road tunnel and
country and in the tunnels of Delhi’s un-
longest bridge. The tunnel slashes driving
derground railway. Some passengers had
time between Jammu and Srinagar, the
to wait for hours in shirt-drenching heat. 
winter and summer capitals of the state of
Five years on, India’s famously creaky
Jammu & Kashmir, by two hours. It also
transport infrastructure is starting to look
makes the route passable all year round.
strong. The power on which parts of it de-
The new bridge (pictured when it opened
pend has also become far more reliable.
in May) spans the vast and moody Brah-
The embarrassing system-wide collapses
maputra river, a once-formidable barrier
of 2012, and an earlier one in 2001, are now
running through the north-eastern state of
scarcely conceivable. A rush to expand the
Assam. Another one nearing completion
electricity supply has been so successful
will, for the ﬁrst time, link Kashmir by rail
that analysts now warn of a looming ex-
to the rest of India. Rising a dizzying 359
cess of generating capacity.
metres (1,178 feet) over a gorge, it is the
On paper, India has long claimed some
world’s tallest railway bridge.
of the world’s most extensive road and rail
networks. That belied reality: roads were
twisting, bumpy, crowded and dangerous.
Railways were largely single-track, which
caused delays, or narrow-gauge, which
limited their ability to carry large loads. By
car or train it was rare to sustain speeds of
more than 50kph (30mph). Puzzled tour-
ists wondered why distances that looked
small on a map took forever to traverse.
The rail network had barely expanded
since the days of the British Raj, despite
having to handle some 8bn passengers a
year. India’s remoter corners were tied to

China does it quicker
With less drama, transport networks are
being overhauled. The central government
has doubled budgets for both road- and
rail-building since 2012, to a combined total
of close to $30bn a year at today’s ex-
change rate. Progress on building express-
ways has been unimpressive. Unlike in
China, where the government has been
able to build big roads at astonishing speed
thanks, not least, to its ability to kick farm-
ers oﬀ their land at will, in India a more liti-
gious system makes it harder to appropri-

For daily analysis and debate on Asia, visit
Economist.com/asia

ate land. India’s government is also more
sensitive than China’s to farmers’ political
opinions (in India they can vote in proper
elections). Building roads from which their
animals and tractors are excluded is un-
popular in the Indian countryside. But lo-
cal governments are paving and widening
rural roads at a rate of 117km a day. 
On the railways, better signalling and
tracks have pushed up the speed of faster
trains to a respectable 140kph. Work is
about to start on India’s ﬁrst dedicated
high-speed rail link, a 500-km track be-
tween the western city of Ahmedabad and
the commercial capital, Mumbai. When
the ﬁrst line of the Delhi Metro opened 15
years ago, many passengers were sur-
prised by its fast, clean and eﬃcient ser-
vice. India’s capital now has six such lines,
some running below ground. Seven cities
have such rapid-transit systems. Eight
more are building them. 
More striking still is the growth in air
traﬃc. Domestic passenger numbers have
doubled since 2010, to nearly 100m a year.
Last year alone the number surged by 23%.
Indian airlines are snapping up new air-
craft, with some 450 in operation and more
than 1,000 on order. Mr Modi’s govern-
ment has brought cheer to fast-growing
private airlines. It plans to privatise much
or all of the loss-making national carrier,
Air India, and has also pushed through an
ambitious scheme to encourage the use of
smaller airports. Through a mix of subsi-
dies and guarantees to airlines, plus ticket-
price caps for passengers, the scheme aims
to put 31 unused airports into passenger
service and boost connectivity to 12 more
that are reckoned to be underserved. 
There will be plenty of power to oper-
ate them. Installed generating capacity has
more than doubled since 2007. The capaci-
ty of power projects now being built
should double it again from the present 

1

20 Asia

2 level, assuming they are all completed. Im-
provements to transmission are no less im-
pressive. “We have a more advanced, more
ﬂexible grid than Europe’s,” enthuses Vi-
nayak Chatterjee, an infrastructure consul-
tant. He says the country can now more
easily transmit power over long distances,
such as from the north-east (which has a
surplus) to the often undersupplied south. 
The boost to India’s infrastructure has
not been problem-free. An exuberant rush
into public-private partnerships for big
projects a decade ago left many private
ﬁrms taking on bigger ﬁnancial risks than
they could manage. Many ventures stalled.
Infrastructure-related deals are reckoned
to account for around 10% of the nearly
$200bn in non-performing loans that cur-
rently bog down India’s ﬁnancial system.
The government’s own projects have
not all run smoothly, either. A grim report
by the state’s main auditing agency earlier
this year painted a picture of incompe-
tence and corruption in the Indian army’s
Border Roads Organisation, which is re-
sponsible for building strategic roads along
India’s mountainous border with China
(see Banyan). Out of 61 roads that the agen-
cy was supposed to have built between
1999 and 2012, only 36% had been complet-
ed by 2016, the report revealed. Some of the
unﬁnished ones came to a dead end in im-
passable gorges, or were abandoned be-
cause diﬀerent stretches turned out to be
impossible to join.
That is galling for India, which often
rates its progress by comparing itself with
China. Having spent three decades beeﬁng
up its own infrastructure before India be-
gan to get in on the act, the northern giant
has set standards that India will still take
decades more to match. 7

Politics in Japan

A dogﬁght

T O K Y O

Shinzo Abe has faced a grilling in the
legislature over alleged wrongdoing
AFTER winning election for Japan’s pre-
miership four times in a row, Shinzo
Abe has a reputation for arrogance. Before
parliament broke up in June for the sum-
mer he jeered his opponents and called
their questions “stupid”. At one point he
told ministers to read newspaper articles
on his policies instead of bothering him for
an explanation. A noticeably humbler Mr
Abe was grilled this week in both houses
of the Diet, Japan’s parliament, over allega-
tions—which he denies—that he abused his
oﬃce to grant a favour to a chum. Amid the
furore, his popularity has plummeted. 
His troubles were evident earlier this

month when his Liberal Democratic Party
(LDP) suﬀered its worst result ever in an
election for Tokyo’s regional assembly. On
July 24th a poll by the Mainichi, a liberal
newspaper, put support for Mr Abe at 26%,
the lowest since his stunning return to
power in 2012 after years in the political
wilderness, and ten percentage points low-
er than in late June. His stumbling perfor-
mance at the Diet hearings on July 24th
and 25th—called during the legislature’s
holidays to clear up the alleged scandal—
did little to help. 
Few politicians were convinced by Mr
Abe’s insistence that he played no part in
nudging oﬃcials to help the Kake Educa-
tional Institution open a college for veteri-
narians in western Japan, says Takao
Toshikawa, an analyst. Mr Abe said that he
and Kotaro Kake, the institution’s director,
“go way back”. But the prime minister in-
sisted they had never discussed the appli-
cation to build the college. The approval
was worth millions of dollars in free land
and grants, and seemed curious: demand
for vets in Japan is declining, along with
the number of pooches and other pets. 
Mr Abe’s unusually long tenure as
prime minister followed years of rapid
turnover in the job. At least until this scan-
dal, he appeared on course to become Ja-
pan’s longest-serving post-war prime min-
ister in November 2019. Last year the LDP
acknowledged his popularity by changing
its rules to allow him to seek a third term
next year as the party’s president. With the
LDP and like-minded parties in control of
both houses of the Diet, the way seemed
clear for Mr Abe to achieve his goal of
amending Japan’s paciﬁst constitution to
end the ambiguous status of the armed
forces. That plan is not popular, but it
would boost his standing among conser-
vatives who think the American-drafted
constitution unfairly restricts Japan’s abili-
ty to defend itself. 
Mr Abe’s re-election as the LDP’s leader
now looks in doubt. On August 3rd he is ex-
pected to attempt to reboot his fortunes by
sacking his most unpopular ministers.
Among the likely casualties are Tomomi
Inada, his gaﬀe-prone defence minister,
and Katsutoshi Kaneda, the justice minis-
ter, who was accused of trying to stiﬂe Diet
debates on a bill, passed in June, concern-
ing conspiracy to commit terrorism and
other serious crimes. Critics of the legisla-
tion said it would infringe civil liberties. 
The reshuﬄe will give the prime minis-
ter breathing space but will not end his dif-
ﬁculties. Government auditors are due to
publish a report soon on another alleged
sweetheart deal, this one involving claims
that Mr Abe secretly helped with the open-
ing of an ultranationalist kindergarten (he
has denied these allegations, too). Mr Abe
will probably survive, says Mr Toshikawa,
the analyst. But for the ﬁrst time since 2012,
he is looking very vulnerable. 7

The Economist July 29th 2017

Labour in the Philippines

Endo without end

S I N G A P O R E

The Philippine leader breaks a vow to
reform labour laws. That may be good
AS A presidential candidate, Rodrigo Du-
terte had strong views about “contrac-
tualisation” and “endo”—big ﬁrms’ habit of
hiring employees indirectly, via temping
agencies, often on renewable ﬁve-month
contracts. He agreed with labour activists
that corporate giants use these practices to
avoid providing health care and other
beneﬁts, and said they should be banned.
Indeed, he promised to lean on Congress
to ban contractualisation in the ﬁrst week
of his presidency. “Pay the beneﬁts,” he
growled on the campaign trail. “Don’t wait
for me to catch you because I will be unfor-
giving. You will not only lose your money,
you will lose your pants.” 
Over a year into Mr Duterte’s term, em-
ployers remain clothed. In March Silvestre
Bello, Mr Duterte’s labour secretary, signed
an order that sets stricter guidelines about
when ﬁrms can hire temporary workers
through employment agencies. But ban-
ning third-party hiring entirely would re-
quire action from Congress, Mr Bello ex-
plained. In a speech on May Day Mr
Duterte promised to sign an order outlaw-
ing contractualisation, but has not yet
done so. “Give me more time,” he pleaded
to the crowd. In a state-of-the-nation ad-
dress on July 24th, he failed to mention the
topic. 
According to the most recent data (from
2014), around 30% of Philippine workers
are on temporary contracts. They include
apprentices and people hired for seasonal
or project-based work such as construction
labourers. That is in line with some rich 

1

No end to their complaints 

The Economist July 29th 2017 

2 countries that have highly regulated la-
bour markets: around 30% of Spanish
workers are on ﬁxed-term contracts, for ex-
ample. Sacking workers with open-ended
contracts is diﬃcult in the Philippines. 
Labour groups accept that some jobs
demand some ﬂexibility. But about half of
temporary workers are hired through la-
bour agencies—and therein, say activists,
lies the potential for abuse. Rene Magtubo,
a spokesman for Nagkaisa, a Philippine la-
bour coalition, contends that jobs that are
“necessary and desirable” to a company’s
core business should be ﬁlled by regular
workers hired by the company, with bene-
ﬁts, not temporary workers hired through
staﬃng agencies. Mr Magtubo says he is
willing to help the president draft an exec-

utive order to end contractualisation, and
that it could be done within three months.
“But if there’s no action on the part of the
president,” he warns, “we’re open to mass
actions to pressure him.”
Businesses remain worried. One repre-
sentative of a big conglomerate says that a
ban would cause ﬁrms to hire fewer peo-
ple. They are also likely to pass on higher
costs to their customers. That would trim
the spending power of Filipino consumers,
the engine of the economy, in two diﬀerent
ways. But the Employers’ Confederation of
the Philippines can live with the labour
secretary’s order in March. The organisa-
tion predicts that hiring will increase de-
spite it. In the long run, that may do more
for Mr Duterte’s popularity. 7

South Korean hairstor y

How wigs tell the story of South Korea

S E O U L

The bald truth, with nothing swept under the rug
“SELL your hair,” clamoured sweet-sell-
ers in Seoul in the 1950s. The capital
of South Korea had been pulverised by a
three-year war with North Korea. Southern
women were cutting oﬀ and selling their
tresses, typically worn in a long plait or a
low bun, for dollars, rice and rubber shoes.
The hawkers sold the jet-black locks to
wigmakers in Guro, a district of south-
western Seoul that was home to the ﬁrst in-
dustrial complex built in South Korea after
the war for the export market. (A year into
the ﬁghting, half of the country’s factories
were in ruins.) In the 1960s thousands of fe-
male labourers soaked, stitched and styled
the hair of their destitute countrywomen
in Guro’s factories.
The wig industry in South Korea has
proved remarkably resilient. Today it is
South Korean women who are its fastest-
growing source of demand. They snap
them up for $1,000 apiece from Hi-Mo, a
maker of custom wigs that began business
in 1987 as an exporter and now dominates
the domestic market. Hi-Mo Lady, a sister
business, began ﬁve years ago. Its wigs and
toupees are made in China with Chinese
hair, mixed with a durable synthetic ﬁbre
of Hi-Mo’s own called NEXART. Demand
from other countries remains huge. Fifty
years after exporting their ﬁrst hairpieces,
South Korean-run factories, almost all of
them abroad, still weave the majority of
the world’s wigs, says Lee Hyun-jun of the
Korean Wig Association. 
The wig business in South Korea has
played a lustrous role in the country’s de-
velopment. By the end of the 1960s, wigs
made up roughly one-tenth of South Ko-

rea’s total exports by revenue. In the next
decade they became its third-most-export-
ed product, after textiles and plywood.
One-third of the wigs worn by Americans
in those years are thought to have been
made in South Korea (it beneﬁted from an
anti-communist ban on Chinese hair in
1965). It was then a state-sponsored indus-
try—an emblem of dirigisme under Park
Chung-hee, a dictator who seized power in
a coup in 1961 and ruled for 18 years. .
Wigs turned into a symbol of South Ko-
rea’s struggle to put an end to rule by such
strongmen. Among Park’s cheerleaders

Asia 21

was YH Trade, a wigmaker that was found-
ed in 1966 with ten workers and expanded
to 4,000 within four years. It quickly
earned a state prize for “Excellence in Ex-
ports”. In 1979, due to heavy debts, it sacked
hundreds of workers. Around 180 of them
staged a sit-in to demand compensation;
police stormed the factory, and a 21-year-
old protester died from beatings. Among
the demonstrators was Kim Young-sam, a
legislator who let them use his party’s of-
ﬁces. In 1993 he became South Korea’s ﬁrst
civilian president in the democratic era.
Kim Kyung-sook, the protester who
died, was like millions of others who left
the countryside in the 1970s for Seoul; she
began factory work straight after primary
school. Her wages, which she sent home,
helped put her younger brother through
secondary school. She often stitched wigs
until 4am. One of her co-workers says they
were “worked like machines”. Some be-
came addicted to the stimulants that they
were given to stay awake. 
Part of the reason that YH closed was
that the wig industry was growing new
roots. In the 1980s, as South Korea grew
richer and wages soared, plants were
moved to China and South-East Asia. 
In today’s South Korea, the ordeal of
workers like Kim now seems other-world-
ly. The country’s GDP per person is roughly
that of Italy; over two-thirds of its young-
sters go to university. Democracy is en-
trenched; protests are routine. (In January
a court cleared four YH protesters who had
been prosecuted for those early demon-
strations at the factory.) Yet South Koreans
still lead stressful lives: they work among
the longest hours in the rich world, at
school and in the oﬃce. Local trichologists
say that changing diets and air pollution
also help to explain why a quarter of South
Koreans are losing their hair.
In South Korea, products to combat hair
loss have become a multi-billion-dollar
market. Magniﬁcent mops are a marker of
professional success. A man was recently
ﬁred on his ﬁrst day of work at a hotel after
bosses uncovered his hair loss (he ap-
pealed to the country’s human-rights com-
mittee). Manufacturers have taken note:
last year, to promote its wares, Hi-Mo of-
fered free rentals of wigs or toupees to
graduates for their job interviews. Women,
shunning domesticity to stay longer in the
workforce, have become new buyers.
Hi-Mo says the market is growing more
luxuriant across a broad range of age-
groups. Its sales have risen by over 40%
since 2010, and its ﬁrst-time buyers are be-
coming younger: over a quarter of its male
users are in their 30s. Those whose custom
Hi-Mo manages to secure often stick with
the company’s hairpieces for a lifetime, it
says. If used daily, they last about a year: in
a country with one of the world’s longest
life expectancies, that is a head-spinning
prospect for wigmakers. 7

22 Asia

The Economist July 29th 2017

Banyan

Daggers out at the chicken’s neck

The longer a stand-oﬀ between India and China persists, the more dangerous it will become

dagger from Tibet points southward, separating most of the Indi-
an state of Sikkim, to the west, from Bhutan, to the east. Were Chi-
na to extend a road system south to the full extent of its claim, it
would reach a ridge that is just 100km north of a vulnerable point
on the Indian plains below: the “chicken’s neck”, a 21km-wide
corridor connecting mainland India to the eight states of its
north-east. India has a metaphorical pinched nerve too: China’s
annual defence spending dwarfs India’s, $215bn to $56bn.
A solution may be hiding in misty Bhutan, a Buddhist country
that has far more in common culturally with the neighbouring
Chinese region of Tibet than it does with India. It ﬁnds its rela-
tionship with its neighbour to the south increasingly embarrass-
ing—a legacy of days when Bhutan was a protectorate of British
India. Its foreign relations are still handled by diplomats in Delhi,
albeit unoﬃcially. That means it can get caught up in Indian spats
with China that have nothing to do with it. In May, India decided
to snub China by staying away from an international summit in
Beijing to discuss China’s “Belt and Road Initiative”—a scheme to
link China to its neighbours and countries beyond with a splurge
of spending on infrastructure and power projects. The point of In-
dia’s gesture was to show its anger at China’s extension of the
scheme into the part of Kashmir that is controlled by Pakistan but
claimed by India. Struggles over Kashmir do not aﬀect Bhutan’s
gross national happiness index, its much-vaunted means of mea-
suring its progress. But Bhutan, presumably under orders from In-
dia, stayed away from the gathering in Beijing, too. 
Some politicians in Bhutan would like their country to pursue
a more independent policy, and China is keen to encourage that.
Having Bhutan as a friend would make it all the easier for China
to control that strategic swathe of the Himalayas and cause India
to squirm. Why then move troops into an area claimed by Bhu-
tan? It could make sense, says Bérénice Guyot-Réchard, a histori-
an at King’s College London and author of “Shadow States: India,
China and the eastern Himalayas”. The message China may be
trying to send to India’s protégé is: if you deal with us directly in-
stead of through Delhi, we might be more sympathetic to your
border claims and walk quietly out of Doklam. 

Glacial change
But Bhutan cannot turn its back on India so easily. It is the biggest
single recipient of Indian aid. India is the main market for its gla-
cier-melt hydropower. India supports Bhutan’s puny army. And
India’s prime minister, Narendra Modi, is conscious of China’s
designs: his ﬁrst trip abroad after taking oﬃce in 2014 was to Bhu-
tan. The kingdom’s fear of changing the status quo may explain
why the stand-oﬀ in the Himalayas has persisted far longer than
previous surges of tension between China and India along their
border in recent years. It becomes all the more worrying when
you consider that Mr Modi and China’s president, Xi Jinping, are
nationalists who want to be seen as strongmen.
Fortunately, however, there is one thing that matters more to
Mr Xi than praise for defending China’s border claims. That is sta-
bility. In the build-up to a sweeping reshuﬄe of the leadership ex-
pected this autumn, he is preoccupied with political struggles at
home: a shooting match with India that risked escalating into
war would be a dangerous distraction. As for Mr Modi, a conﬂict
ending in the kind of defeat that India suﬀered in 1962 would be
ruinous for his country and might ﬁnish his political career. Both
countries are far more powerful than they were 55 years ago. It
can only be hoped that they do not misjudge their strength. 7

FOR nearly six weeks, armed contingents of two of the biggest
military forces in the world have faced oﬀ in a high-altitude
game of chicken in the Himalayas. Roughly 300-400 Indian sol-
diers and an equal number of Chinese border guards are stuck
glowering at one another over a scrubby patch of land at a “tri-
junction”, where the two countries and the tiny kingdom of Bhu-
tan all meet. Analysts cannot see how either side might easily
stand down. Memories of a bloody border war fought between
China and India in 1962 are all too easily evoked.
That war, which saw India humiliated, began after the Chi-
nese built a road across disputed territory in the far west of the
two countries’ 4,000km-long, disputed border. The latest prob-
lems began when Chinese border guards were spotted moving
road-making equipment onto the Dolam plateau, a ﬂat spot in
the slightly larger region known as Doklam (or Donglang in Man-
darin) which all three sides patrol. On June 18th Indian troops
moved onto the plateau to prevent the resurfacing of a dirt track.
No shots were ﬁred, though a shoving match was captured on
video. Doklam is the subject of a long-standing territorial dispute,
one of many in the region. What makes India’s actions extraordi-
nary is that the dispute is not between India and China, but rather
between China and Bhutan. India makes no claim to the plateau,
which it says it has moved onto on Bhutan’s behalf. What is less
clear is whether Bhutan, an ally which India has in the past
treated as a vassal, really wanted Indian help.
The Chinese government claims that India’s incursion is a
black-and-white instance of breach of sovereignty—and it has a
case. Chinese oﬃcials cannot appear soft, for fear of ridicule at
home. The more rabid parts of their media are already rattling sa-
bres. The defence ministry has vowed to stand ﬁrm in Doklam,
warning that it is “easier to move a mountain than to shake the
People’s Liberation Army”. The government says the Indians
must withdraw entirely before the matter can be discussed. 
Some historical context is in order. The 1962 war was fought on
multiple fronts all along the Himalayan range. Before it was over,
the Chinese had surged through the eastern Himalayas down
into India’s isolated north-east (they later withdrew). Now, as
Chinese might grows, Indian strategists worry that the north-east
is becoming ever more imperilled. As it is, a jagged cartographic

China

The Economist July 29th 2017 23

China and Russia

Unlikely partners

B E I J I N G , M O S C OW A N D V L A D I V O S T O K

Xi Jinping and Vladimir Putin are cosying up. But mutual suspicions are deep
ON JULY 21st three Chinese warships
other capital city. In 2013, during a meeting
sailed into the Baltic Sea for China’s
in Indonesia of leaders from the Asia-Pacif-
ﬁrst war games in those waters with Rus-
ic region, he even attended a private birth-
sia’s ﬂeet. The two powers wanted to send
day party for Mr Putin. Over vodka and
a message to America and to audiences at
sandwiches they talked about their fa-
home: we are united in opposing the
thers’ experiences in the second world
West’s domination, and we are not afraid
war—Mr Putin’s against Germany and Mr
to show oﬀ our muscle in NATO’s back-
Xi’s against Japan. In 2015 Mr Xi was the
yard. The war games were also intended to
guest of honour at a military parade in
show how close the friendship between
Moscow that was held to mark the 70th an-
China and Russia has become—so much
niversary of the war’s end, and was boy-
has changed since the days of bitter cold-
cotted by Western leaders because of Rus-
war enmity that endured between them
sia’s war in Ukraine. Four months later Mr
from the 1960s to the 1980s.
Putin attended a parade in Beijing celebrat-
There has been an abundance of such
ing China’s victory in the war against Ja-
symbolism in recent weeks. On his way to
pan. South Korea’s then president, Park
this month’s meeting in Germany of lead-
Geun-hye, was the only leader of an Amer-
ers from the G20 group of countries, Chi-
ican ally who showed up. 
na’s president, Xi Jinping, stopped oﬀ in
Moscow. There his Russian counterpart,
Vladimir Putin, hung an elaborate medal-
lion around his neck: the Order of St An-
drew, Russia’s highest state award. At the
G20 (where they are pictured), “only two
leaders in the world exuded calm conﬁ-
dence,” Dmitry Kiselev, a cheerleader for
the Kremlin, said on his television show in
reference to Mr Putin and Mr Xi. “Russia is
pivoting to the east. China is turning to the
west—towards Russia,” he crowed. 
Since he became China’s leader in 2012,
Mr Xi has visited Moscow more than any

Fellow autocrats
Mr Xi and Mr Putin take comfort in each
other’s authoritarian bent. China has cop-
ied Russia’s harsh laws on NGOs; the
Kremlin has been trying to learn how Chi-
na censors the internet. During Mr Xi’s re-
cent visit to Moscow, the two leaders lis-
tened to a speech by Margarita Symonyan,
the boss of Russia Today, the Kremlin’s for-
eign-language television channel. Ms Sy-
monyan told them that Russia and China
were victims of “information terrorism”
by the Western media. She said the two

countries must help each other because
“we alone stand up to the mighty army of
Western mainstream journalism.”
Mr Xi has been obliging. Russia’s Chan-
nel One—its main television channel,
which has been whipping up anti-Ameri-
can fervour and support for Russia’s land-
grab in Ukraine—has obtained permission
to launch a cable service in China, called
Katyusha, with subtitles in Chinese. Ap-
propriately for the propaganda counter-at-
tack that the two leaders see themselves as
waging, Katyusha is the name of a Soviet
rocket-launcher. 
The breakdown of Russia’s relationship
with the West as a result of the conﬂict in
Ukraine has driven it further towards Chi-
na. But the camaraderie masks fundamen-
tal diﬀerences. Russia needs China far
more than China needs Russia. And Russia
feels uncomfortable about such an unbal-
anced relationship that highlights a ﬂaw in
the Kremlin’s claim of Russian greatness.
Russia is wary of its far more populous and
economically potent neighbour, which is
rapidly gaining in military power.
For its part, China worries about Rus-
sia’s willingness to challenge the post-cold
war order. It has beneﬁted from globalisa-
tion far more than Russia, and so is less in-
clined to disrupt the status quo. 
Take China’s response to Russia’s inter-
vention in Ukraine. Leaders in Beijing have
turned a blind eye to it (just as Russia has to
China’s seizing of disputed shoals in the
South China Sea). But China has not for-
mally recognised Russia’s annexation of
Crimea. Chinese oﬃcials are fearful of
how some people in China might interpret
events there. After Crimea voted in a bogus
referendum to join Russia, censors in Chi-
na ordered media to play down the event. 

1

24 China

2 They did not want people in Taiwan, Tibet
or the far western region of Xinjiang to
think about determining their own future
through such means. They also did not
want Chinese nationalists to clamour for
bolder moves to annex Taiwan. 
For China, economic ties with America,
and therefore political ones, are hugely im-
portant. By comparison, Russian trade
with America is negligible (see chart). In its
trade with Russia, China is mostly interest-
ed in Russian oil and gas. Last year Russia
overtook Angola and Saudi Arabia as the
country’s biggest supplier of crude oil. In
2014 Russia and China signed a deal worth
an estimated $400bn to pump natural gas
to China from two ﬁelds in eastern Siberia
via a new pipeline. The deliveries are set to
start in December 2019. But negotiations
over energy supplies are often bitter. Rus-
sia would like to divert to China oil and gas
that is currently piped to Europe from west-
ern Siberia. But the two countries have not
agreed on the funding of new pipelines
that would be needed. Given the current
low price of natural gas, China is reluctant
to invest in building them.
The only other exports from Russia that
matter to China are arms. Since the col-
lapse of the Soviet Union in 1991, Russia
has sold China $32bn worth of them,
amounting to nearly 80% of all China’s
arms imports. It has recently supplied Chi-
na with advanced S-400 surface-to-air mis-
sile systems, and state-of-the-art Sukhoi
SU-35 ﬁghter jets. The Kremlin used to wor-
ry about China’s eﬀorts to reverse-engi-
neer them. But Alexander Gabuev of the
Carnegie Moscow Centre says that Russia
now recognises that China’s technological
advance is unstoppable. Russia might as
well make money from selling arms to Chi-
na while China still has an interest in buy-
ing them from abroad rather than making
them itself. Russia’s interests are merce-
nary rather than strategic: it also sells arms
to China’s rivals, India and Vietnam. 

The allure of silk
With Russia’s access to international capi-
tal markets now severed as a result of sanc-
tions, China has become Russia’s main
source of funds. Friends of Mr Putin,
shunned by the West, are the main beneﬁ-
ciaries. One of them is Gennady Tim-
chenko (“our man in China”, as Mr Putin
describes him). Along with a son-in-law of
Mr Putin, Mr Timchenko is a co-owner of
Sibur, a petrochemical ﬁrm. In December
2015, Sibur sold 10% of its shares to Sinopec,
China’s largest state-owned oil reﬁnery, for
$1.3bn. Last year Sibur sold another 10% of
its shares to China’s state-backed Silk Road
Fund, which invests in infrastructure.
As Chinese leaders see it, helping such
people is a price worth paying in order to
keep the supplies of energy and weapons
ﬂowing. But they see little prospect of Rus-
sia’s economy yielding any more than that.

Amer ica’s pull

Trade in goods with the United States, $bn

600

500

400

300

200

100

0

China

Russia

2007 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16

Source: UN Comtrade

“For China, Russia matters ﬁrst and fore-
most as a security issue, not as an eco-
nomic one,” says a Chinese expert. 
For that to change would require funda-
mental economic reform in Russia. Under
Mr Putin, there is no prospect of that. Priv-
ate investors in China shy away from Rus-
sia for the same reasons that their Western
counterparts do: the lack of a robust legal
system and clearly deﬁned property rights.
A senior Russian banker in China says a
deep-rooted contempt for China in the
Kremlin also gets in the way. “Russia’s big-
gest problem is that it does not know what
it wants from this relationship. Our gov-
ernment wants Chinese money without
the Chinese,” he says.
China has no illusions about Russian
power. It sees it as weak and in decline.
Successive American governments have
reached the same conclusion. But whereas
American leaders have tended to react by
ignoring Russia, Chinese ones have done
the opposite. They believe that an angry,
declining power with nuclear arms re-
quires more, not less, attention. Having
watched Russia become a growing pro-
blem for the West, they do not want it to be-
come a headache for China, too. 
They know from history what a pro-
blem Russia can be for China. The “un-
breakable friendship” between Russia and
China that was declared by Stalin and Mao
in 1950 nearly ended in a war between the
two countries less than 20 years later. Fu
Ying, a former Chinese diplomat who is
now a legislator, remembers her fear as a
teenager living close to China’s 4,200km
(2,600-mile) border with Russia where
hundreds of thousands of Soviet and Chi-
nese troops faced oﬀ and the risk of war
seemed very real. “The fact that we can be
friends and no longer fear each other is sig-
niﬁcant in itself,” says Ms Fu.
Russia is also nervous of China. Despite
this week’s war games in the Baltic Sea
(and other joint ones in the past two years
in the South China Sea and the Mediterra-
nean), Russia stages exercises in prepara-
tion for a possible conﬂict with China. It
fears that its densely populated neighbour

The Economist July 29th 2017

may one day decide to grab sparsely popu-
lated lands in Russia’s east. Russian mili-
tary planners are conscious of history: al-
though China’s government is too polite to
say so, ordinary Chinese recall that parts of
that region, including Vladivostok, were
China’s until the 19th century. 
The two countries spar for inﬂuence in
Central Asia, where China has become the
leading trading partner for all the former
Soviet republics (apart from Uzbekistan),
as well as the region’s largest investor. Rus-
sia likes to think of itself as being the para-
mount military and political power in
Central Asia, while China focuses on the
economy. Yet as Bobo Lo, an Australian ex-
pert on the relationship, argues in a recent
book, this arrangement is unsustainable.
Mr Xi’s “Belt and Road Initiative”, aimed at
linking China with Central Asia and coun-
tries beyond through infrastructure and
energy projects, will give China much po-
litical clout in the region. 
The asymmetry between Russia and
China is particularly evident in Russia’s
east. A few years ago residents there were
spending their fast-rising incomes in Chi-
na. But the rouble has become much weak-
er, and so has Russia’s economy. They now
look to high-spending Chinese as their sav-
iours. The numbers of such visitors are rap-
idly growing (though few venture there a
second time). In Vladivostok, a travel agent
says the city does not have enough decent
rooms to accommodate them. On the
streets, young Russians try to sell them old
Soviet coins and banknotes. 
Residents’ sense of shame at their coun-
try’s decline relative to China is palpable.
In one hotel, Chinese visitors ﬁll a stuﬀy
restaurant where they watch scantily
dressed dancers and women singing Rus-
sian folk songs. A performer walks out for
some fresh air. Her face shows pain and
humiliation. Chinese ships in the Baltic
Sea (one is pictured), eight time zones
away, will not make her feel any better. 7

Ready to play with Russia

United States

The Economist July 29th 2017 25

Also in this section
26 Sanctions against Russia
27 Jeﬀ Sessions in per il
28 Skinny repeal, explained
28 Soldiers and culture wars
29 Detroit, the movie
29 New York neighbourhoods
30 Lexington: Norman Rockwell

For daily analysis and debate on Amer ica, visit
Economist.com/unitedstates
Economist.com/blogs/democracyinamer ica

Americans are eating a lot more imported
food (an increased appetite for fruit and
vegetables plays a big part, too). Between
1998 and 2012, the share of America’s fresh
produce that was imported increased by
80%; the NEA attributes a chunk of the de-
crease in American farmers’ share of the
domestic produce market to the labour
shortage.
California, which produces a third of
America’s vegetables and two-thirds of its
fruits and nuts, has been particularly af-
fected. The Farm Labour Survey and US
Census of Agriculture record that the state
lost nearly 40% of its agricultural work-
force between 2002 and 2014. According to
the Grower-Shipper Association of Santa
Barbara and San Luis Obispo Counties,
$13m-worth of fruit and vegetables had to
be ploughed under in 2015 because of the
lack of pickers—up from $11m in 2014. At Li-
moneira, overripe lemons litter the ground
under the trees. 
Farmers blame the labour shortage on a
variety of factors. Fewer Mexicans are
coming north to America, the result of a
combination of improved border security,
an increasingly robust economy in Mexico
and a lower birth rate. Analysis by the Pew
Research Centre in 2015 found that net mi-
gration to America from Mexico was 2.3m
between 1995 and 2000. Between 2005
and 2014, more Mexicans left America
than arrived. Such dynamics have been
tough for farmers. According to the most re-
cent data from the Department of Labour,
70% of farm workers are Mexican; in Cali-
fornia that number is closer to 90%. 
A generally tight labour market does
not help either. Harvesting is gruelling
work, says Stewart Lockwood, the director
of ﬁeld operations at Limoneira, as he
walks through one of the company’s lem-
on groves. With the Californian sun beat-

1

Labour shortages

The market for lemons

S A N T A P A U L A , C A L I F O R N I A

Far from being overrun, America has too few low-skilled migrants to pick its crops
NEAR the massive packing warehouse
show a slight fall in the number of farm
at the headquarters of Limoneira, one
workers between 2000 and 2012, the New
of America’s largest lemon producers, sits
American Economy (NEA), a group which
a row of small white clapboard houses
advocates immigration reform, reckons
with neat front lawns and American ﬂags
that on a more realistic count, from 2002 to
ﬂapping over their doorways. The homes
2014 the workforce actually shrank by 20%.
are rented to farm workers at 55% below
Bob Young, the chief economist for the
the market rate in Santa Paula, California, a
American Farm Bureau Federation, a lob-
fertile farming area not far from the seaside
by group, thinks oﬃcial numbers underes-
homes of Malibu. From their front doors,
timate the extent of the shortfall since they
workers can stroll to a bocce court, a credit
ask how many workers a farmer has, not
union and a park where family reunions
how many he wanted but could not ﬁnd.
and birthdays are celebrated. These perks,
Farms are feeling this eﬀect. According
along with competitive pay, used to be
to the NEA, the farm-labour shortage ac-
enough to keep Limoneira’s ﬁelds of lem-
counted for $3bn in lost annual revenue
ons and avocados full of workers. Not any
between 2002 and 2014. Partly because
more, says Alex Teague, the company’s se-
production cannot keep up with demand,
nior vice-president. Though labour has
long been tight, “I have never seen it this
bad,” Mr Teague sighs from a chair in his of-
ﬁce whose walls are covered in company
memorabilia, including Limoneira’s ﬁrst
cheque from 1893. 
Across America, farms are experiencing
similar troubles. In May Tom Nassif, the
president of Western Growers, a farming
association representing family farmers in
Arizona, California, Colorado and New
Mexico, travelled to Washington, DC, with
25 farm-owners. When Senator Dianne
Feinstein of California asked how many
were experiencing labour shortages, they
all raised their hands. Although oﬃcial
data from the Department of Agriculture

Fiscal years ending September 30th
Source: Depar tment of State, Bureau of Consular Af fairs

2006 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16

Plugging a gap

United States, temporar y foreign
agr icultural worker visas issued, ’000

140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0

26 United States

The Economist July 29th 2017

2 ing down on them, labourers crouch to
pluck lemons oﬀ low branches and strain
to grab them from high ones, carefully
placing the fruit in satchels that weigh 65lb
(30kg) when full. With a state unemploy-
ment rate of 4.5%, manual labourers can af-
ford to be choosy. “If these guys can get a
job in construction, they might do that in-
stead,” Mr Lockwood says. 
Farmers have responded to the labour
shortage in three main ways. The ﬁrst is by
paying better. Since 2000, the average
hourly wage of crop workers has risen
from $8 to $12. In California it has jumped
even more, from about $7 in 2000 to $13 to-
day. At Limoneira, workers are paid an av-
erage of about $19 an hour—which is
30-35% higher than three or four years ago,
says Mr Teague. Still, his workers some-
times get poached by nearby farmers will-
ing to pay more so that their fruit and vege-
tables do not rot in the ﬁeld. 
Another response to the shortage is to
hire workers through the H-2A visa pro-
gramme. Since 1986, the H-2A programme
has allowed farmers struggling to ﬁnd la-
bour to hire foreign guest-workers tempo-
rarily. It is cumbersome to apply for and ex-
pensive: farmers must provide H-2A
workers with free housing, food and tran-
sport to work. Even so, 134,000 H-2A visas
were granted nationally in 2016, up from
55,000 in 2011. (Despite the president’s di-
rective to companies to “hire American”,
Eric Trump, the president’s second son, has
requested 29 H-2A workers to prune vines
at the family’s winery in Charlottesville,
Virginia, since December 2016.)
Limoneira’s adjustment has been
smoother than most. The company al-
ready owned a huddle of trailers that dates
back to the bracero programme, when Mex-
ican farmworkers came north across the
border to replace Americans ﬁghting in the
second world war. These have been refur-
bished to house migrant workers. Other
companies have rented, bought or even de-
veloped property to house workers. Boni-
pak, a company based in Santa Maria,
bought and renovated an old motel to
house farm labourers, spending more than
$1m to bring the building up to H-2A stan-
dards. A couple who owned a strawberry
farm in Nipomo built a series of houses for
H-2A workers in 2016, only for arsonists to
burn one down in protest. 
Farmers are considering ways to substi-
tute machines for human hands, too. Ma-
chinery is already used to shake almonds
from trees and pluck tomatoes from their
stalks. Vineyards are using more machines
to pick their grapes, a process which once
seemed too ﬁddly to be mechanised.
Squishy crops that grow close to the
ground, such as strawberries, will be the
last to go. Many machines do still require
humans to operate them. But farmers be-
lieve it is only a matter of time until the har-
vesting of most crops is automated. 7

Sanctions against Russia

They don’t trust him

The sanctions legislation to be passed by Congress is humiliating for the president
MEMBERS of Congress do not agree on
much, but on July 25th, after a biparti-
san deal, the House of Representatives vot-
ed by 419 votes to three for a bill that tough-
ens
sanctions
on Russia. This
is
punishment both for Russia’s meddling in
the election that brought President Donald
Trump to power, and for its continuing ag-
gression in Ukraine. (The bill also includes
new sanctions against Iran and North Ko-
rea.) As The Economist went to press, the
Senate was expected to follow suit: sena-
tors endorsed a similar bill 98-2 in June.
The aim is to get the legislation passed be-
fore the summer recess and sent to the
president for his signature. 
The implications are momentous. Mr
Trump had hoped to lift the existing pack-
age of sanctions on Russia at some point.
Now he has been stripped of his presiden-
tial authority to do so. Since the vote was
almost unanimous, he may have no op-
tion but to accept it with as much good
grace as he can muster. He could veto it, but
presidential vetoes can be overridden by a
two-thirds majority in both chambers,
which in this instance could be achieved.
The bill both locks in and extends previ-
ous sanctions aimed at Russia’s energy
ﬁrms and banks. It also now targets any en-
tity that does business with Russia’s de-
fence or intelligence sectors—a measure
that could threaten buyers of Russian
weapons with secondary sanctions. This
is a blow to Mr Trump, who made it clear
during his campaign that he wanted im-

proved ties with Moscow. It now appears
that many of the undeclared meetings that
have subsequently come to light between
Mr Trump’s inner circle of advisers—Mi-
chael Flynn, Jared Kushner and Donald
Trump junior—and an assortment of Rus-
sians with links of various directness to the
Kremlin, most notably Sergey Kislyak, the
ubiquitous and gregarious former Wash-
ington ambassador, were aimed at thaw-
ing relations.
Vladimir Putin—who, beyond the rea-
sonable doubt of America’s intelligence
agencies (if not its president), authorised
the election-hacking operation—may have
had reason to believe that Mr Trump, once
in the White House, would ﬁnd a way to re-
lax sanctions. American and European
Union sanctions have dragged down Rus-
sia’s economy, which, already reeling from
low energy prices, contracted sharply in
2015 and has stagnated since. 
By overreaching, Mr Trump and Mr Pu-
tin have made the relaxation of sanctions
politically toxic. That is bad enough for Mr
Trump, but his humiliation does not end
there. The Republican majority in Con-
gress has, in essence, declared that it does
not trust a president from its own party to
serve the national interest when it comes
to dealing with Russia. There is no other
way to interpret the provision in the legis-
lation to prevent the president from sus-
pending sanctions by executive order, in
the absence of congressional approval, as
Barack Obama did in order to secure the 

1

It’s out of my hands, Vlad

The Economist July 29th 2017 

2 nuclear deal with Iran.
To lift Ukraine-related sanctions, Mr
Trump would have to certify by letter that
the conditions which had led to them no
longer applied—in other words, that Rus-
sia’s annexation of Crimea and its support
for separatists in the east had ceased. Simi-
larly, the new sanctions brought in to pun-
ish Russia for its cyber-attacks could be
eased only if Mr Trump could show solid
proof that Russia was actively and success-
fully clamping down on such activities.
After receiving such a letter, Congress
would then have 30 days to decide wheth-
er the president had made his case con-
vincingly. Tellingly, the same conditions do
not apply to the sanctions on North Korea
and Iran.
Foreign-policy practitioners, including
Mr Trump’s secretary of state, Rex Tiller-
son, have warned that this creates a poten-
tially damaging precedent. By deliberately
tying this president’s hands over Russia, al-
beit with good reason, Congress risks un-
dermining the ability of future administra-
tions to conduct diplomacy, which often
requires ﬂexibility in light of changing cir-
cumstances. The bar for eventually remov-
ing sanctions will be so high that, in eﬀect,
they become permanent.
America’s European allies are worried
too, both about the longer-term eﬀects of
this bill and the immediate impact of some
of the new measures contained in it. The
penalties that could be levied on European
ﬁrms taking part in the controversial Nord
Stream 2 pipeline project, which on pre-
sent plans will start pumping gas from Rus-
sia to Germany in 2019, have already raised
concerns in Berlin and Brussels. Those
qualms are not shared by all EU countries,
especially former members of the Soviet
bloc, such as Poland and the Baltic states,
who want to reduce their dependence on
Russian energy.
How might Mr Trump respond to such a
setback to his ability to conduct foreign
policy on his own terms? One possibility is
that it will increase his determination to
ﬁnd a way out of the Iran nuclear deal,
which, like Obamacare, he once pledged to
scrap. For America’s nuclear-related sanc-
tions on Iran to remain suspended—a key
condition of the 2015 agreement—the State
Department must inform Congress wheth-
er it believes Iran to be in full compliance
every 90 days. So far, Mr Trump has twice
reluctantly agreed to certify and thus re-
new the presidential sanctions waiver. But
when he did so on July 17th, it was only
after kicking back hard against the recom-
mendation of most of his senior foreign-
policy and national-security team.
The White House now seems to be
looking for a way to get out of certifying the
Iran deal when it comes up for renewal in
October. To that end, the president has or-
dered White House staﬀers to bypass Mr
Tillerson and to come up with the evi-

dence and arguments he needs to undo the
deal that the State Department has failed to
provide. Mr Tillerson is reported to be fed
up with his lot.
It is still not clear whether Mr Trump
wants to kill the Iran deal or try and rene-
gotiate it—something that the other parties
to it (Britain, France, Germany, Russia, Chi-
na and the EU) have already ruled out. But
on Iran, unlike Russia, Mr Trump can al-
most certainly rely on the support of Re-
publicans in Congress for whatever he de-
cides to do. After the ignominy of losing
control over sanctions against Russia, the
urge to appear decisive and in control may
be hard for Mr Trump to resist. 7

Jeﬀ Sessions in per il

Pondering the next
big crisis

W A S H I N G T O N , D C

If Donald Trump sacks his attorney-
general, America is in big trouble
P ERHAPS the only reason to doubt Do-
nald Trump is contemplating sacking
his attorney general, Jeﬀ Sessions, in order
to protect himself and his associates from
the counter-espionage investigation being
run by Robert Mueller, is that the president
has been so astonishingly upfront about it.
On July 25th he tweeted that the attorney-
general, one of his earliest and most inﬂu-
ential supporters, was “VERY weak”.
Asked whether he intended to sack him, he
replied: “Time will tell.” Yet Mr Trump’s
history of rule-breaking suggested he was
indeed weighing a measure that would
pitch his scandal-plagued presidency into
its biggest crisis yet.
Mr Trump said he was angry with Mr

United States 27

Sessions because he had recused himself
from an FBI investigation into Russia’s ef-
forts to ﬁx the election in Mr Trump’s fa-
vour, with possible assistance from mem-
bers of the Trump campaign team. Mr
Sessions announced that decision in
March, after it was revealed that he had
withheld details of meetings with a Rus-
sian diplomat, Sergey Kislyak, during his
Senate conﬁrmation hearings.
The indirect cost to Mr Trump of Mr Ses-
sions’s recusal is that the FBI probe has
now been passed to an independent coun-
sel, Mr Mueller, a former FBI director with a
reputation for probity and rigour earned
under both Republican and Democratic
administrations. His investigation, which
is more public and high-powered than the
FBI’s, was launched by Mr Sessions’s depu-
ty, Rod Rosenstein, after Mr Trump ﬁred
James Comey as FBI director in May. Ac-
cording to Mr Comey, he was axed after he
denied a request from the president to
drop part of his investigation—into another
arch-Trump supporter, Michael Flynn.
It seems unlikely that Mr Sessions, had
he not
recused himself, would have
launch the independent probe into Russia
and the Trump campaign; as the ﬁrst sena-
tor to endorse Mr Trump, he played a lead
role in that campaign. Given that Mr
Mueller was hired over two months ago, it
is also reasonable to assume that the presi-
dent’s problem with Mr Sessions does not
really concern the fact that he let the probe
happen so much as that, because of his re-
cusal, he cannot end it.
Unlike the more powerful oﬃce of the
independent counsel, which was scrapped
in 1999 after plaguing the presidency of Bill
Clinton, a special counsel can be sacked,
for due cause, by the attorney-general (or,
in the current situation, by Mr Rosenstein).
The president, as head of the executive
branch, can legitimately demand such a
step, provided he also identiﬁes due cause.
And there is little doubt that the president
wants to see the back of Mr Mueller, who is
reported to have begun investigating Mr
Trump’s ﬁnancial aﬀairs. The president has
suggested some members of the counsel’s
team of a dozen top-notch investigators are
“conﬂicted”, perhaps because of past do-
nations to Democrats (though Mr Trump
was once a donor to them too).
Mr Trump and his family are also feel-
ing the heat from three congressional in-
quiries, after revelations that the presi-
dent’s eldest son, Donald Trump junior,
son-in-law Jared Kushner and then cam-
paign boss, Paul Manafort, met a party of
Russians during the campaign to discuss
possible dirt on his Democratic rival, Hilla-
ry Clinton. Mr Kushner was interviewed
about the meeting, behind closed doors,
by the Senate intelligence committee on
July 24th and the House intelligence com-
mittee the next day. In a pre-released state-
ment, he denied having colluded with any 

1

28 United States

2 foreign power. Mr Manafort, who is sepa-
rately reported to have owed pro-Russia
Ukrainians $17m shortly before he was
hired by Mr Trump, testiﬁed in private to
the Senate intelligence committee. Both he
and Donald junior are expected to appear
before the judiciary commitee.
After a slow start, there are signs that all
three congressional committees are start-
ing to take their investigations seriously.
They are unlikely to reach any conclusion
before Mr Mueller does. Yet as Congress
represents by far the most important po-
tential check on Mr Trump’s rule, the presi-
dent will understand that sacking Mr
Mueller, after ﬁrst sacking Mr Sessions,
would spark a backlash. How seriously he
is contemplating it must therefore depend
on how worried he is about what Mr
Mueller might ﬁnd. 7

Health reform

Getting thinner

W A S H I N G T O N , D C

To pass health-care reform, Republicans
may strip it down
IT HAS become a fool’s errand to try to
predict when the Republicans may give
up trying to reform health care. On July
25th Vice-President Mike Pence broke a tie
in the Senate to pass a motion to start de-
bate on a health bill, only a week after it
had looked dead (and not for the ﬁrst time).
To win the vote Mitch McConnell, the
leader of the Senate, had to water down its
signiﬁcance, portraying it as merely a pro-
cedural step that had no bearing on what
might subsequently pass. (“Everybody
will get a vote on everything they want to
vote on,” said Senator John Cornyn, Mr
McConnell’s number two). Even then, the
motion passed only because Senator John
McCain, just out of surgery for brain can-
cer, rushed back to Washington to vote yes. 
The result is a mad rush to rewrite the
bill on the Senate ﬂoor. The starting point is
the version passed by the House in May.
After voting to start debate, nine Republi-
cans rebelled to defeat an amendment
turning the bill into the “Better Care Recon-
ciliation Act”, the reform Mr McConnell
had painstakingly crafted. (In any case, the
Senate’s rules expert had declared that
parts of the BCRA needed 60 votes, and
hence Democratic support, to pass.) The
next day, seven Republicans helped Demo-
crats reject the Obamacare repeal bill that
Congress passed back in 2015 (it was ve-
toed then by Barack Obama). Moderate Re-
publicans oppose total repeal because it
would deeply cut Medicaid, health insur-
ance for the poor, and abolish the tax cred-
its which help low- and middle-income

people buy insurance on online market-
places, or exchanges.
As a result, Republicans may resort to
what has been dubbed “skinny repeal”.
This amendment would take a scalpel,
rather than an axe, to Obamacare. Medic-
aid expansion would stay, as would the
law’s regulations and tax credits. Instead,
the bill would probably repeal only those
parts of Obamacare Republicans dislike
most: its “mandates”. These impose ﬁnes
on people who choose not to buy health
insurance, and on large employers who do
not provide insurance for their staﬀ.
Moderate Republicans may ﬁnd skinny
repeal easier to support, because it would
leave Medicaid intact. But failing to replace
the individual mandate would greatly
threaten the stability of the market serving
18m Americans who buy insurance for
themselves. The Congressional Budget Of-
ﬁce has suggested that killing the mandate
would increase the number of people
without health insurance by 15m by 2018.
Nonsense, say conservatives. But without
the mandate, it would certainly be easier
for people to ﬂee the individual market’s
high premiums, caused by Obamacare’s
ban on insurers discriminating against
buyers who are already ill. The likely result
would be more premium increases, a still
smaller market, and the very “death spiral”
that Republicans say they want to stop.
A collapse of the individual market
would hardly look good for those in power
(although President Donald Trump has
spoken of his desire to kill oﬀ Obamacare
in an attempt to force Democrats to sup-
port a replacement). More likely is that the
bill gets rewritten again in the committee
that would have to reconcile the bills
passed by the House and the Senate.
Health reform could seem to die, only to be
resurrected, a few more times yet. 7

It’s gr im in New York

The Economist July 29th 2017

Gender politics

Trans action-man

W A S H I N G T O N , D C

How the president does politics
FOR a man late to politics, President
Donald Trump has a master’s feel for
divisive “wedge issues”—as gay and
transgender Americans are learning to
their chagrin. In 2016 Mr Trump de-
lighted gay Republicans by hailing
“LGBTQ citizens” at his nominating
convention. In part this reﬂected a Man-
hattanite’s relaxed worldview. It was
also a bid to divide gays from his Demo-
cratic rival, Hillary Clinton, accused by
Mr Trump of planning to open borders to
homophobic followers of radical Islam.
This year, on July 26th, Mr Trump
unexpectedly tweeted that after consult-
ing “my Generals” he will ban trans-
gender individuals from military service,
reversing an Obama-era decision from
2016. Mr Trump cited the “tremendous
medical costs and disruption” of allow-
ing such troops to serve.
His intervention was timely. With
public opinion growing ever more toler-
ant towards gay Americans, partisans on
right and left are making the once-ob-
scure ﬁeld of transgender rights a place
for culture-war battles. Republicans in
the Texas legislature have spent months
debating how to police transgender
users of public lavatories. In Washington
this July, conservatives in the House of
Representatives narrowly failed to bar
the Pentagon from funding gender-
related medical treatments. Exposing
intra-party divisions, more than 20
Republicans joined Democrats in oppos-
ing that ban.
A study for the Pentagon issued last
year by the RAND Corporation, a re-
search group, estimated that there are
between 1,320 and 6,630 transgender
servicemen and women on active duty,
of whom at most 270 might seek gender-
transition hormone treatments or surger-
ies in a year, adding up to $8.4m to annu-
al military health costs of around $6bn.
For perspective, in 2015 the Pentagon
spent $437m on military music.
Earlier this summer James Mattis, the
defence secretary, gave commanders
until January 2018 to weigh whether
admitting transgender recruits would
harm force “readiness and lethality”,
delaying an Obama-era deadline by six
months. Advocates note that 18 countries
allow transgender troops, from Britain to
Israel. Mr Trump’s political calculations
are easier to follow. Just as Democrats
ponder how to win back blue-collar
voters, they ﬁnd themselves defending
transgender rights. A neat wedge.

The Economist July 29th 2017 

United States 29

New York neighbourhoods

Harlem shuﬄe

H A R L E M

Why some names stick and others do not
HARLEM’S Apollo Theatre, where Ella
Fitzgerald ﬁrst sang, and the Hotel
Theresa, which counted among its guests
Josephine Baker, Muhammad Ali and
Fidel Castro, are landmarks. Malcolm X,
who called Harlem “Seventh Heaven”,
preached on the corner of 116th Street.
Stretching further back, in the 1920s and
1930s the Harlem Renaissance gave rise to
an outpouring of literature, art and mu-
sic. Harlemites are proud of this history,
and proportionately upset that estate
agents are trying to rebrand the southern
part and call it SoHa.
Such rebranding is nothing new: New
York was once called Nieuw Amsterdam
and before that Mannahatta. Pigtown, in
central Brooklyn, is now called Wingate.
Gas House District is now Stuyvesant
Town. Yellow Hook became Bay Ridge
after a yellow-fever outbreak. Blooming-
dale became the Upper West Side. Neigh-
bourhoods can be ﬂuid, with vague
borders. Some have disappeared. Shapes
change: in Brooklyn, Park Slope keeps
getting bigger and Flatbush keeps getting
smaller. Chinatown has been taking over
Little Italy.
SoHo, so-called because it is south of
Houston Street, was better known until
the 1960s as Hell’s Hundred Acres. It was
the ﬁrst to use an acronym, and has
spawned imitators. Tribeca (triangle
below Canal Street) emerged in the 1970s.
Despite, or perhaps because of, its silly
name, Dumbo (Down Under the Man-
hattan Bridge Overpass) is one of the
most sought-after areas in the city. NoHo
(north of Houston) and NoLita (North of

Little Italy) are now on maps. Others, like
SoBro (south Bronx), BoCoCa (Carroll
Gardens, Cobble Hill and Boreum Hill,
which is in fact ﬂat) and Rambo (Right
after the Manhattan Bridge Overpass),
mercifully did not stick. “None of these
worked,” says Philip Kasinitz, a sociol-
ogist at City University of New York. “At a
certain point they got too silly.”
They also didn’t work, he says, be-
cause their residents objected. ProCro, a
rebranding of Crown Heights, another
historically black neighbourhood in
Brooklyn, did not take either. Hell’s Kitch-
en is equally resilient. Attempts to change
the name to the generic Clinton have not
been successful. It is a lot easier to re-
brand when there are few residents, as
was the case in SoHo. Brokers also rely on
recent arrivals not knowing the city well.
“You can’t talk about this without
talking about race,” says Amy Plitt of
Curbed, a property blog. Aﬄuent white
New Yorkers have ﬂocked to Harlem,
followed by restaurants, bars and shops.
The stock of cheap housing has dwin-
dled. Longtime residents, already feeling
ﬁnancial pressure, resent what they see
as a deliberate move to erase their his-
tory. “It’s about identity,” said Brian
Benjamin, a Harlem-born state lawmak-
er. He recently introduced legislation in
Albany requiring estate agents to consult
the community on any name change, or
face a ﬁne. Others see a clumsy attempt
to link SoHa to SoHo in the minds of
would-be buyers, making it cooler and
justifying higher prices. But nowhere is
cooler than Harlem.

the Detroit Free Press and the Urban League
of Detroit surveyed 437 people who lived
around 12th Street and Grand River Ave-
nue, the epicentres of the riots. They
blamed police brutality ﬁrst for the trouble,
followed by overcrowded living condi-
tions, poor housing, a lack of jobs and pov-
erty. Although around 40% of the city’s res-
idents were black at the time, 95% of the
police force was white. “If you were a black
man in the wrong part of town at night, po-
lice would frisk you, hurl epithets and of-
ten beat you,” says Thomas Sugrue, author
of a book on race and inequality in post-
war Detroit.
The unrest in 1967 did not mark the turn-
ing point in Detroit’s fortunes. That came
earlier, in the 1950s, when carmakers and
their suppliers moved production out of
the city to places with cheaper labour and
land and automation replaced low-skilled

jobs. According to Mr Sugrue, the city’s east
side lost ten plants and 71,137 industrial
jobs between 1953 and 1960. The plant clos-
ings aﬀected shops and housing stock.
Once vibrant neighbourhoods and com-
mercial arteries started to decay.
Sadly, by most measures black Detroi-
ters are considerably worse oﬀ today than
they were in 1967. Then, 19% lived below
the poverty line. Today 40% of the city’s
residents live at or below it. The city is still
segregated, with many more houses va-
cant or derelict than 50 years ago. The rates
of violent crime and unemployment are
higher. Public schools are in much worse
shape. Even so, the relationship between
the police and the community has much
improved. The police force today is 58%
black in a city that is 80% so. James Craig,
the police chief, wants as many of his 2,400
oﬃcers to see the ﬁlm as possible. 7

Detroit, the movie

Riots remembered

D E T R O I T

How ﬁve days in 1967 changed a city
FIFTY years ago, Detroit lived through
one of the worst riots in American his-
tory. So painful were the memories of the
ﬁve days of killing, looting and arson that
during previous anniversaries of the upris-
ing, which started on July 23rd 1967 when
police busted a “blind pig”, an unlicensed
gambling and drinking joint, Detroiters
largely avoided talking about it.
Many believe the riots marked the be-
ginning of the city’s decline, culminating
in its bankruptcy in 2013. This anniversary
is diﬀerent. Around 100 institutions, in-
cluding the Charles H. Wright Museum of
African American History and the Detroit
Institute of Art, are reﬂecting on 1967 with
books and booklets, exhibitions, docu-
mentary ﬁlms, lectures and concerts. The
eﬀort has its own fancy logo and slogan
(“Looking back to move forward”).
On July 25th Hollywood descended on
Detroit for the red-carpet premiere of “De-
troit”. The ﬁlm dramatises one particularly
violent incident during the riots, at the Al-
giers motel on Woodward Avenue, when
several young black men and two white
women were forced to line up in the hall-
way with their hands up. Their interroga-
tion by the police ended in violence and
murder. Dressed to the nines, an audience
of around 2,200 ﬁlled the venue. They
clapped loudly when Michael Eric Dyson,
a local historian, introduced the director,
Kathryn Bigelow, as “a white woman
cleaning up the mess white people made”.
A few days after the uprising, which left
43 dead, more than 7,000 in jail and thou-
sands of uninsured businesses destroyed,

30 United States

The Economist July 29th 2017

Lexington

Norman Rockwell’s lost America

A revealing visit to the hometown of an all-American “people’s painter”

the civil-rights era depicting a young black girl, Ruby Bridges, be-
ing escorted to a newly integrated school by federal marshals.
The image provoked shock when it was published in Look maga-
zine in 1964, in part because it was so recognisably a Rockwell: the
same precise brush-stokes depict the girl’s dress, her solemn ex-
pression and the racist graﬃti behind her. The Rockwell muse-
um’s archives hold a letter from a reader in New Orleans, accus-
ing the artist of abetting the “vicious crime of racial integration”
with the illustration. Another letter, from Chattanooga in Tennes-
see, thanks him for opening the eyes of “this White southerner”.
As social and political tensions roiled America in the late
1960s, Rockwell edged away from his studied neutrality. He
chafed at editorial guidelines that non-white ﬁgures could not
take centre stage in illustrations, unless they were portrayed as
train stewards or in other service jobs. He urged Middle America
to see the good in civil-rights workers, Vietnam war opponents
and long-haired hippies, assuring fans that the young were “do-
ing great, you just give them a chance”. This Rockwell is revered
by such Democratic-leaning Hollywood types as the ﬁlm direc-
tors Steven Spielberg and George Lucas, both of them Rockwell
collectors. Mr Lucas, creator of the “Star Wars” ﬁlms, also recalled
his childhood as a “Norman Rockwell world” of Saturday morn-
ing bonﬁres in the back yard and long hours lost in books.
For those dreaming of bipartisan comity, the Rockwell muse-
um is a bittersweet place. Distinctly 20th-century forces helped
the artist rise, and are not coming back. Rockwell worked when il-
lustrated magazines enjoyed vast market power and were trusted
to help turn readers—whether residents with deep roots or new
immigrants—into conﬁdent, robust, modern Americans. His cov-
ers were seen by millions, some of whom framed and hung them
on their walls. In today’s fragmented media environment, says
Stephanie Haboush Plunkett, chief curator at the museum, never
again will “so many people see the same thing at the same time”.

Vote for Rosie the Riveter
The Saturday Evening Post was proudly middlebrow. Its editor
scorned elites and worried that Franklin Roosevelt’s New Deal
safety-nets and public works might sap the country’s capitalist
ethos. But the Post had the swagger to commission ﬁction from F.
Scott Fitzgerald and William Faulkner. It also carried Rockwell’s
paintings of the “Four Freedoms” that FDR vowed to defend in
1941 as he prepared public opinion for entry into the world war.
Rockwell depicted a New England town meeting for “Freedom of
Speech”, heads bowed in prayer for “Freedom of Worship”, a
Thanksgiving meal for “Freedom from Want” and parents watch-
ing children sleeping in “Freedom from Fear”. A national tour of
the paintings drew huge crowds in 16 cities and raised $133m in
government war bonds, the equivalent of $2bn today.
Rockwell had to work at staying neutral during the class-
tinged culture clashes of his day. He winced, discreetly, when his
works were called intelligible and homely, unlike modern art. He
conﬁded to his youngest son: “Just once, I’d like for someone to
tell me that they think Picasso is good, and that I am too.” He was
attacked by highbrow critics as a sentimentalist and as a sell-out
for taking advertising jobs. But crucially, cultural camps did not
yet bear ﬁxed ideological labels. This was a time of Eisenhower
Republicans who took a liberal line on racial or social issues, and
of conservative Democrats in Middle America. Deep down,
Rockwell was a Yankee progressive whose work was loved by
conservatives. Today’s partisans expect heroes to take sides. 7

WILL a truce ever be declared in America’s culture wars? One
way to tackle that puzzle involves considering all-American
icons of the past—ﬁgures who bridged social and political di-
vides—and asking how they did it. That mission led Lexington to
Stockbridge, Massachusetts, and the Norman Rockwell Museum.
Modelled on a New England town hall, it is a handsome shrine to
an artist whose work has hung in the Oval Oﬃces of the past four
presidents (though a Rockwell painting of the Statue of Liberty’s
torch seems to have vanished from Donald Trump’s).
Rockwell lived from 1894 to 1978 and enjoyed popular acclaim
for 60 of those years. He honed an image as an apolitical advo-
cate of Yankee civic virtues, at one remove from the sordid busi-
ness of party politics, even as he painted every major presidential
candidate from Eisenhower to Nixon. His biographer, Laura Cla-
ridge, records his belief that the best way to reach a large audience
was “to let people hope he voted their way”.
When Ronald Reagan, late in his presidency, explained how
Rockwell’s art had captured American’s heart and soul, he might
have been describing himself. The Great Communicator hailed
the artist for portraying the country with compassion, humour
and goodwill and for cherishing the values that give Americans
strength, namely: “love of God and Country, hard work, neigh-
bourhood, the family”.
Other Republicans have seen the same in Rockwell’s idealised
paintings, full of roguish boys and pious grandparents, baseball
games, kindly policemen, daydreaming adolescents, heroic
workers and self-important intellectuals. Interviewed in 1994, on
the brink of his elevation as Speaker of the House of Representa-
tives, Newt Gingrich called his congressional district in suburban
Georgia a “sort of Norman Rockwell world”, whose prosperity
and safety reﬂected the worldview of the weekly magazine that
made Rockwell’s name, the Saturday Evening Post. The artist him-
self could sound rather conservative, as when he recalled why he
shunned New York city, his childhood home, for a succession of
towns in rural New England. Rockwell cited “the American nos-
talgia for the clean, simple country life”.
Yet plenty of Democrats, too, see their principles reﬂected in
Rockwell’s work. In 2011 Barack Obama oﬀered a wall in the West
Wing to display “The Problem We All Live With”, a painting from

The Amer icas

The Economist July 29th 2017 31

Also in this section
32 From bank robbers to customers
Bello is away

Migration to Mexico

Fewer rivers to cross

C I U D A D H I D A L G O , C H I A P A S

Asylum-seekers used to pass through the country. Now many want to stay
THE Suchiate river is the southernmost
fairs. Since Mr Trump took oﬃce arrests of
stretch of Mexico’s border with Guate-
migrants at the United States’ southern
mala. At Ciudad Hidalgo there are two
border, half of whom are Central Ameri-
ways to cross it. You can use the bridge,
cans, have dropped dramatically.
which guarantees an encounter with an
But some people from Central Ameri-
immigration oﬃcial. Or you can walk
ca’s poor and violent “northern tri-
down to the river bank, hire a raft (planks
angle”—El Salvador, Guatemala and Hon-
tied to the inner tubes of two tractor
duras—dare not stay at home, regardless of
wheels) and get yourself punted across.
the frosty reception that would await them
Many passengers are Guatemalans who
in the United States. For some of those,
want to shop in Ciudad Hidalgo, where
Mexico is a destination rather than a corri-
goods are cheaper. The Mexican border
dor. Maria (not her real name), who is liv-
guards ignore the ﬂotilla below them and
ing at a migrant hostel in Mexico City, ﬂed
its duty-dodging cargoes; they bring the
Guatemala with her two children early
town a lot of business. 
this year after her husband, who has gang
Such rafts are also popular with Central
connections, nearly killed her. He was sent
Americans heading farther north, to the
United States. But
their number has
dropped in recent months, says Alexander,
who has piloted a raft for four years. Occu-
pancy at the Casa del Migrante in nearby
Tapachula has fallen by more than a third
since 2016, says Julver Gordillo, who works
at the hostel. Immigration police are catch-
ing far fewer Central Americans without
the right documents this year (see chart). 
The deterrent is Donald Trump. His ad-
ministration’s temporary ban on refugees,
increase in the deportations of unlawful
migrants and plans to build a border wall
have put oﬀ would-be migrants. “He’s
been good at scaring people,” says Gustavo
Mohar, a former Mexican undersecretary
for migration, population and religious af-

Sources: US Depar tment of Homeland Secur ity;
Mexican National Migration Institute

By US south-west
border patrol 

Oct Nov Dec

Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun

Central
Amer icans
in Mexico

Migrant apprehensions, ’000

Net loss

2016

50

40

30

20

10

0

2017

to prison, but Maria fears he will carry out
his threat to try again. She will not attempt
to enter the United States. “As long as I feel
safe we’ll stay here,” she says.
Central Americans are making that
choice in growing numbers. To stay in Mex-
ico legally, most have to apply for asylum.
In the ﬁrst six months of this year 7,000 mi-
grants, almost all Central Americans, re-
quested asylum. That compares with
9,000 for all of 2016. Liduvina Magarín, El
Salvador’s deputy minister for Salvador-
eans living abroad, says that around 90%
of countrymen whom she met on a recent
tour of Mexican migrant shelters were
planning to request asylum there.
Mexico faces nothing like the inﬂux that
Europe has recently experienced. Ger-
many, whose population and territory are
much smaller, had 750,000 asylum re-
quests in 2016. In theory, Mexico is just as
welcoming. It grants asylum to people per-
secuted for their race, religion, nationality,
gender, membership of a social group or
political views. But it thinks of itself as a
source of migrants rather than a magnet for
them. So the rise in the number of refugees
is causing consternation.
Typical of the river-crossers who now
propose to stay in Mexico is “Carlos”, who
ﬂed Honduras after refusing to carry out a
“mission” for a gang. He wants to ﬁnd work
in northern Mexico but has taken shelter in
Tapachula while he awaits a decision on
his asylum application. A decade ago such
fugitives were almost all men, but as gangs
increasingly threaten their enemies’ rela-
tives, women and children have joined the
exodus. Under Mexican law, a member of
a family that has been threatened by a gang
may qualify as belonging to a persecuted
social group. 
Mexico’s attractions include a shared
language and communities of compatri-

1

tention to Central America. During Barack
Obama’s presidency, the United States in-
creased its spending on projects in the re-
gion that aim to reduce violence and im-
prove job prospects, especially for young
men. As Mr Trump turns his back on the
United States’ southern neighbours, Mexi-
co may become more active. Central
America should be Mexico’s “top foreign-
policy concern”, says Mr Mohar. That is un-
likely to happen: the United States is
plainly more important. But as rafts contin-
ue to cross the Suchiate river, the northern
triangle and its woes will move up the dip-
lomats’ agenda. 7

Banking for the FARC 

Capitalism 101

B O G O T Á

Guerrillas who used to rob banks are
now opening accounts
DURING their decades-long war against
the Colombian state, the supposedly
pro-peasant guerrillas of the FARC were
fond of bombing and torching branches of
Banco Agrario in remote parts of the coun-
try. A state-owned bank lending to farmers
and rural-development projects, it was a
tempting target on two counts: attacks
were a blow against the state, and they of-
ten yielded sackfuls of cash. 
With the ratiﬁcation of a peace accord
between the government and the FARC
last year, the terrorist-target relationship is
becoming more of a customer-company
one. After laying down their arms, more
than 7,000 FARC guerrillas are opening
bank accounts and picking up debit cards,
many for the ﬁrst time. As part of their inte-

32 The Amer icas

2 ots. Perhaps 300,000 Central Americans
live in Mexico (compared with more than
3m in the United States). Mexico processes
asylum requests much faster than the Un-
ited States and Canada do. 
But its welcome is cooler than that sug-
gests. Speedy asylum decisions are not
necessarily fair. “The government has prio-
ritised detaining and deporting migrants
as soon as possible—and is not ensuring
they get properly screened,” says Maureen
Meyer of the Washington Oﬃce on Latin
America (WOLA), an NGO. In 2014 Mexico
deported 77 out of every 100 unaccompa-
nied children it caught; in the same year
the United States sent back just three. Mi-
grants encounter discrimination and are
often robbed. Violence against migrants is
“chronic” and is rarely punished, says a re-
cent report by WOLA. According to some
estimates, more than half of female mi-
grants from Central America are victims of
sexual assault.
The country has not always been hos-
tile terrain for outsiders. In the mid-19th
century it admitted thousands of fugitive
slaves from the United States; under the
constitution of the time they became free
when they set foot on Mexican soil. From
1939 to 1942, when Britain and France
turned away some refugees from Spain’s
civil war, Mexico let 25,000 in. But by the
1970s the government, worried about un-
employment, restricted entrance to “use-
ful” migrants and made it a criminal of-
fence both to enter and to stay in the
country without authorisation. (In the Un-
ited States, entering the country illegally is
a crime but staying there is a civil oﬀence.)
In 2014, with encouragement and cash
from the United States, Mexico stepped up
its eﬀorts to catch migrants headed north.
Mexico deports children of migrants born
in the country, in violation of its own laws,
says Salva Lacruz of the Fray Matías de Cór-
dova human-rights centre in Tapachula.
Under pressure from activists and from
migrants themselves, Mexican attitudes
are softening. The attorney-general’s oﬃce
has established a unit to investigate crimes
against migrants. The country’s president,
Enrique Peña Nieto, has promised to pro-
mote refugees’ integration into society and
to increase the staﬀ of COMAR, the com-
mission that is responsible for the welfare
of asylum-seekers and rules on their appli-
cations. Entering and staying in the coun-
try without papers stopped being a crime
in 2008. The success rate for asylum claims
rose from 40% in 2014 to 63% last year.
Even with these improvements, the
government pays too little heed to mi-
grants’ rights, says Mr Lacruz. He says it
should start by complying with its own
laws, including the one allowing children
born in the country to stay. 
Mr Trump’s harder border, and the ﬂow
of refugees across Mexico’s southern one,
will force the government to pay more at-

The Economist July 29th 2017

gration into law-abiding society, they are to
receive from August a monthly stipend of
663,945 pesos ($220). Each person will also
get a one-time payment of 2m pesos to start
a business. The government has designat-
ed Banco Agrario, which has reopened
dozens of bombed-out branches over the
past decade, to take the lead in opening ac-
counts for the ex-ﬁghters. 
Colombian banks have experience of
catering to reformed irregulars. They
opened accounts for 30,000 right-wing
paramilitary ﬁghters who demobilised be-
tween 2003 and 2005. But many of these
were city-based and had banking histories.
Most FARC ﬁghters, by contrast, have never
left Colombia’s backwaters or handled
money other than cash. Banco Agrario is
leading workshops to teach them the ba-
sics of personal ﬁnance.
The FARC’s new bankers have to be
careful. Unsurprisingly, the country that
provides the setting for “Narcos”, a televi-
sion series about the drug kingpin Pablo
Escobar, has an elaborate system for de-
tecting money-laundering and the ﬁnanc-
ing of terrorism. Banks are obliged to know
if their clients have criminal records. And
accounts opened by ex-combatants are
subject to a greater level of scrutiny. 
The FARC are thought to have amassed
a fortune during their half-century of war
through such activities as drug-traﬃcking,
wildcat gold-mining, kidnapping, extor-
tion and raiding branches of Banco Agra-
rio. Estimates of the group’s annual in-
come at the height of its power in the 1990s
range from $200m to $3.5bn. The FARC say
they have no fortune, and have promised
to pay out whatever money they do have
in reparations to their victims.
If banks come across tainted money,
they must report it. Some of the FARC’s
leaders will remain unbanked. At least 90,
including some of the governing secretari-
at, are still on the US Treasury Depart-
ment’s list of drug-traﬃckers. Any bank
that does business with them risks having
its assets frozen in the United States.
Rank-and-ﬁle ﬁghters are another mat-
ter. Banco Agrario has permission from the
banking regulator to ignore the part of the
account application that asks about their
criminal past. Eventually, the new custom-
ers will be able to move their accounts to
other banks, including private ones, as
long as they declare that their money
comes from legal sources. 
The proﬁt in catering to relatively poor
ex-guerrillas is unlikely to be spectacular,
but it could open up other opportunities.
There is scope to expand in regions once
cut oﬀ by war, and to ﬁnance reconstruc-
tion in such areas. The FARC’s political
party, to start work on September 1st, will
need a place to park its cash. Banks will
gladly take it, as long as the accounts are
not controlled by the blacklisted criminals
of the recent past. 7

Middle East and Afr ica

Libya’s civil war

The increasing heft of General Haftar

C A I R O

A new peace deal lends legitimacy to Libya’s would-be strongman
STUBBORN and self-serving, Khalifa
spread support, at least for now.
Haftar has long been seen as a spoiler of
The outcome in Paris is an acknowledg-
eﬀorts to end the conﬂict in Libya. The
ment that the previous deal, which in-
forces under his command in the self-
stalled Mr Serraj as prime minister in 2015,
styled Libyan National Army (LNA) have
has not united the country as planned. It
mostly added to the chaos, not helped to
also lends more legitimacy to General Haf-
resolve it. Yet General Haftar was greeted
tar, who has tightened his grip on the east
like a statesman by Emmanuel Macron, the
and used his territorial gains to increase his
French president, in Paris on July 25th.
stature. With Egyptian and Emirati support
There he encountered Fayez al-Serraj, a ri-
his forces captured the important oil ports
val who leads the UN-backed government
of Sidra and Ras Lanuf (see map) in Sep-
based in Tripoli, the capital. Their ﬁrst
tember. More recently, they have gained
meeting, three months earlier, produced
ground around Jufra and Sebha. And on
nothing. So it came as something of a
July 6th, after years of ﬁghting and false
shock when the two leaders announced a
ceaseﬁre and their intention to hold elec-
tions in 2018.
“The cause of peace has made great pro-
gress,” declared Mr Macron. In fact, the
deal is but a small step. More agreements
are needed before elections can be held
and the ﬁghting, which now involves myri-
ad groups, is likely to continue. As it is, the
LNA, which backs a separate government
in the east, rarely battles the forces aligned
with Mr Serraj. But General Haftar is free to
keep pummelling terrorists, which is what
he labels most of his opponents. The coun-
try’s powerful militias were left out of the
talks in Paris, which were chaired by the
newly appointed UN envoy for Libya,
Ghassan Salamé. So like previous deals
brokered by the UN, this one lacks wide-

Libyan National Army and local allies
Government of National Accord

Areas of control/presence (July 2017)

Source: Amer ican Enterpr ise Institute

S P A R S E L Y P O P U L A T E D

M e d i t e r r a n e a n S e a

Derna
Tobruk

L I B Y A

Misrata
Sirte

A

I

R
E

G

L

A

Bani
Walid

Sidra

Ras
Lanuf

N I G E R

C H A D

TUNISIA

Tripoli

Jufra

Sebha

Benghazi

E

G

Y
P

T

250 km

The Economist July 29th 2017 33

Also in this section
34 Morocco and Alger ia build fences
35 Israel’s submar ine scandal
35 Spin doctors in Afr ica
36 Fighting goat plague

For daily analysis and debate on the Middle East
and Afr ica, visit
Economist.com/world/middle-east-afr ica 

promises, General Haftar claimed to have
liberated Benghazi, Libya’s second city,
from various Islamist and rebel militias,
though pockets of resistance remain.
With Europe gripped by concerns over
migrants and terrorists streaming out of
Libya, some European oﬃcials now see an
ally in General Haftar. He has already been
embraced by the Russians and seems to be
Donald Trump’s kind of guy. But as more
countries pay him heed, they risk empow-
ering a would-be strongman who has
cracked down on dissent and squeezed
civil liberties in the areas under his control.
His forces have been accused of abuses,
such as killing prisoners. And although the
deal in Paris calls for placing all armed
groups under one command, it is far from
clear that General Haftar would allow any-
one but himself to lead a truly national
army. Many analysts reckon that he will
run for president if an election is held.
As General Haftar’s power has waxed,
Mr Serraj’s has waned. He and the other
members of his presidency council in-
spired much hope when they arrived in
Tripoli in 2016. But three of the council’s
original nine members have either re-
signed or are boycotting the body. The rest
do more bickering than governing. Some
of them resent Mr Serraj for his outsized
role in negotiations with foreign powers.
“Several members think he is not ﬁt to
lead—that he does not have the knowl-
edge, charisma or decision-making capa-
bility,” says Claudia Gazzini of the Interna-
tional Crisis Group, a Brussels-based
think-tank. “That opinion is shared by a lot
of people in the pro-Tripoli camp.”
If the agreement in Paris is to lead to
more substantive progress, Mr Serraj, who
commands no ﬁghting force of his own,
will need to convince the various militias 

1

34 Middle East and Afr ica

The Economist July 29th 2017

2 aligned with his government to lay down
their arms. Relations are already strained.
Those ﬁghting the so-called Islamic State
(IS) complain of a lack of support from the
administration, even after they kicked the
jihadists out of their stronghold in Sirte last
year. (They are now bracing themselves for
a counterattack.) An Islamist government
that preceded Mr Serraj’s outﬁt is still sup-
ported by some of the militias in Misrata
and Tripoli, which continue to cause trou-
ble, even in areas under the control of the
presidency council. 
Mr Serraj has also failed to win over the
public. His government, though it has been
in Tripoli for over a year, still provides few
public services, even in the capital. Its limit-
ed authority is highlighted by the fact that
human traﬃckers are thriving in western
Libya, to the disquiet of the Europeans. The
economy has contracted for the past four
years, with rising prices and a falling dinar
adding to the misery. People must queue
for hours to get money from banks, and on
top of that limits on withdrawals make it
diﬃcult to get enough. The hardship is con-
tributing to a sense that things are better in
the east, where General Haftar at least pro-
vides security.

General Haftar can also claim to have
helped increase Libya’s oil exports. Since
he secured the ports at Sidra and Ras Lanuf,
production has roughly tripled to over 1m
barrels per day. But Mustafa Sanalla, the
head of the national oil company, gets
most of the credit. “He sees how to bring in
investment and expertise, despite the com-
plex patchwork that exists,” says Jason
Pack of the US-Libya Business Association.
Even so, oil production has yet to reach the
levels seen before the revolution in 2011,
leaving the central bank, which uses the oil
revenue to ﬁnance both halves of the coun-
try, short of cash.
With its large oil interests and colonial
history in Libya, Italy had seen the country
as its diplomatic responsibility, especially
as interest from America declined under
Mr Trump. So the French eﬀort has led to
some consternation in Rome. Yet Mr Mac-
ron, conﬁdent though he is, may be under-
estimating the diﬃculty of the road ahead.
The agreement reached in Paris says that
only a political solution should end the
ﬁghting. But Mr Serraj may not be strong
enough to implement one, and few ob-
servers think that General Haftar is done
with the battleﬁeld. 7

Morocco and Alger ia

Open Sesame

M A R S A B E N M H I D I

Fences and sand berms are making the two neighbours poorer
HAD Algeria and Morocco honoured
their agreement back in 1989 to form
an economic union, along with Tunisia,
Libya and Mauritania, they would be
among the Middle East’s largest econo-
mies. Their poor border regions would be
booming crossroads. Over the decade to
2015, reckons the World Bank, their two
economies would each have almost have
doubled in size.
Instead, Algeria grew only by 33% and
Morocco by 37%, as both governments in-
stead reinforced their barricades. Their
north-west corner of Africa remains “the
most separated region on the continent”,
says Adel Hamaizia, an Algerian econo-
mist. While sub-Saharan countries agree
common currencies and trade zones, Alge-
ria digs deeper ditches. Morocco revamps
its berms and renews its razor wire. Con-
crete walls rise on both sides. Frustrated
families shout greetings across the divide.
Tantalisingly, both have built hundreds of
kilometres of east-west highways which
stop short of their common border.
Islamic empires once spanned the Ma-
ghreb, the land of the setting sun, as Arabs
term north-western Africa. Both countries

share a common history, cuisine, architec-
ture, strand of Islam and an Arabic dialect
mashed with Berber and French. But in
1957 colonial French generals erected an
electriﬁed barrier, the Morice Line, along
the border to keep out arms-traﬃckers and
guerrillas based in newly independent
Morocco. Bar ﬁve paltry years in between,
the border has been closed ever since. In
1963 the two countries fought a brief war.
Skirmishes are now rare, but ﬁghting
words are common. Algerian republicans
deride Morocco’s monarch as feudal, and
because of the kingdom’s land-grab of
Western Sahara call him the world’s last
colonial ruler. Their neighbours cannot
help sniggering at Algeria’s latest prime
minister, whose name, Tebboune, is Mo-
roccan slang for “vagina”.
Their prospects should be brighter.
Both countries have largely avoided the
upheavals of the Arab spring. They are al-
most homogeneously Sunni, free of the re-
gion’s sectarian divides. They have the ad-
vantage of cheap labour, and oﬀer Europe
a bridge to Africa. Algeria has had the edge.
It produces copious oil and gas. And it de-
veloped a programme of mass industrial-

Not the best way to enhance trade

isation and agrarian reform after indepen-
dence, while King Hassan II, who died in
1999, preserved his ancient kingdom like a
museum. Algerians spend twice as long in
school as Moroccans, and with so much
oil, they earn almost twice as much.
Yet Morocco is catching up fast, thanks
to its greater economic openness under
Hassan’s son, Muhammad VI. The king-
dom ranks 68th on the World Bank’s mea-
sure for ease of doing business—88 places
above Algeria. Exporting goods from Alge-
ria takes six times as long as from Morocco,
and costs almost four times as much. Alge-
rian businessmen complain that centrali-
sation, corruption and red tape have
crushed local production. Investment is
deterred by a law that limits foreign share-
holders to 49% of any concern. Look at Re-
nault, they say. Its production line in Tan-
giers, in Northern Morocco, is the largest
car manufacturer in Africa to be sourced
from locally made parts. But its plant in
Oran, Algeria’s second city, is little more
than an assembly line. Algeria’s beaches
can rival Morocco’s for beauty. The coves at
Marsa ben Mhidi next to its sandbank with
Morocco are enchanting. But tourism on its
coast remains state-run and spartan, while
Morocco’s are considered some of Eu-
rope’s premier escapes.
The time was when smuggling at least
provided Algerians near the border with a
living. Trucks and donkeys hauled subsi-
dised basics like fuel, ﬂour and sugar to
Morocco, and returned with hashish from
Morocco’s mountainous Rif. But the latest
fortiﬁcations have put paid to that. Young
men who once plied the routes now ﬁll the
mosques with their frustration. Unﬁn-
ished villas line the roads, abandoned. Of-
ﬁcials say the new defences will keep out
the drug barons and the risk of a spillover
of Morocco’s growing Berber unrest. But lo-
cals suspect that at a time of falling oil rev-
enues, the army is simply diversifying its
revenues by hogging the smugglers’ take. 

1

The Economist July 29th 2017 

2 For $80, they say, soldiers will open the
gates of army border crossings at night to
those without papers. 
For ﬁve brief years it was all so diﬀerent.
In 1989 both countries removed visa con-
trols as part of a new Maghreb Arab Union.
Trade moved freely. Algerians went west
on holiday. The two countries parked their
squabble over Western Sahara. Then in
1994 a bomb went oﬀ in Marrakesh, and
King Hassan, nervous that the civil war in
Algeria was heading his way, accused Alge-
ria of involvement and chased out its na-
tionals. Algeria’s generals responded by
closing their borders, battening down the
edges, and retreating into huﬀy isolation.
As with the Gulf Co-operation Council, an-
other trading bloc that has failed to deliver
at the other end of the Arab world, practice
rarely matches fraternal ideals. 7

Israel’s navy

In deep water

J E R U S A L E M

A scandal taints the armed forces,
Israel’s most revered institution
IN A police guesthouse somewhere in Is-
rael, a retired naval captain is writing his
explosive memoirs. Michael Ganor’s story
will not dwell on his exploits on the high
seas. It will talk of bribe-trousering gener-
als and politicians. Mr Ganor was the rep-
resentative in Israel of ThyssenKrupp, a
German industrial ﬁrm, and the middle-
man in some of the largest arms deals in re-
cent years between Israel and Germany.
On July 21st he signed a state’s witness ar-
rangement with Israel’s justice ministry,
agreeing to serve a reduced sentence of a
year in prison and to pay a 10m-shekel
($2.8m) ﬁne in return for disclosing all that
he knows.

Corruption in public life is far from un-
known in Israel. A former prime minister,
Ehud Olmert, went to prison last year for
accepting bribes. Yet this case is diﬀerent.
The Israel Defence Forces (the IDF) come
ﬁrst in surveys of Israel’s most respected in-
stitutions, and IDF commanders are
household names. So details of how mil-
lions of shekels changed hands in the pur-
chase of submarines and surface ships are
galvanising the country. Along with Mr Ga-
nor, a celebrated former commander of the
navy and a former brigadier-general have
also been arrested as prime suspects. More
generals will be questioned in the coming
weeks. 
Mr Ganor is part of an industry in
which former IDF oﬃcers represent Israeli
and foreign companies, all competing to
win contracts for which their old comrades
have drafted the speciﬁcations. This re-
volving door often allows oﬃcers to work
on the systems they use on their frequent
reserve stints back in uniform. The blurred
lines between Israel’s armed forces and
arms industry are a strategic advantage,
some claim. They allow Israel, facing mul-
tiple enemies on rapidly evolving battle-
ﬁelds, to develop and adapt unique tailor-
made weapons, such as advanced missile-
defence systems and “killer drones”,
unusually quickly. But it also opens the
door to corruption. 
“When a general leaves the military
and is hired by an arms company, they’re
being hired for their connections as well. It
leads in many cases to an ethical grey
zone,” says Yaakov Katz, the author of “The
Weapon Wizards”, a book about Israel’s
arms industry.
The investigation is not only shaking
the defence establishment. It is also piling
pressure on the prime minister, Binyamin
Netanyahu. Another of the main suspects
is the prime minister’s personal lawyer of
four decades (and second cousin) David
Shimron, who was also Mr Ganor’s lawyer
and allegedly involved in many of his busi-

The more the merr ier

Middle East and Afr ica 35

ness dealings. Another of the submarine
suspects, former Brigadier-General Avriel
Bar-Yosef, long served Mr Netanyahu on Is-
rael’s National Security Council, and was
appointed by him as its head, resigning be-
fore the scandal broke. 
Mr Ganor would undoubtedly have re-
ceived hefty commissions from Israel’s
submarine and corvette deals with Thys-
senKrupp. Mr Netanyahu did push for the
purchase of more submarines than the de-
fence chiefs had recommended, but the
prime minister has denied any knowledge
of his lawyer’s involvement in the arms
deals and, according to the justice ministry,
is not a suspect in the case.
Nonetheless, he has faced other investi-
gations for a year now. Police have recom-
mended indicting him for fraud and
breach of trust for accepting expensive gifts
from business folk he claims are “close
friends”, but the decision to prosecute rests
with the attorney-general. The prime min-
ister strenuously denies wrongdoing; his
allies say he would remain in oﬃce even if
he were indicted. Then, though, the ques-
tion would become not just “What did he
know or gain?” but “How can he continue
to govern?” 7

Lobbying in Afr ica

For whom Bell
Pottinger toils

N A I R O B I

Spinning for African governments is
lucrative but risky work
THE ﬁrst rule for public-relations ﬁrms is
not to become the story. In South Africa
Bell Pottinger, a British ﬁrm, has done just
that. In May, e-mails between one of the
ﬁrm’s employees and Duduzane Zuma, a
son of President Jacob Zuma, were leaked
to South African newspapers. Bell Pottin-
ger had been hired by a company owned
by the Gupta family, a trio of Indian busi-
nessmen brothers who are chummy with
the president, to bolster their image. 
One can see why they might seek such
help. A report by a former public protector
last year accused them of orchestrating
“state capture” on behalf of the president,
and their names have become a campaign
slogan for the opposition. The e-mails
showed how the ﬁrm had proposed to
push the idea that criticism of the presi-
dent—and the Gupta family—was intended
to perpetuate “economic apartheid”, an in-
cendiary claim in South Africa.
After a barrage of criticism, on July 6th
the ﬁrm apologised and said it had sacked
one of its partners. Their critics are not sat-
isﬁed. The Democratic Alliance, South Af-
rica’s main opposition party, continues to
organise protests outside Bell Pottinger’s

1

36 Middle East and Afr ica

The Economist July 29th 2017

Animal health in Afr ica

An end to goat plague?

M E R U N A T I O N A L P A R K

Still, eradication will be hard. The
Kenyan government has sometimes
oﬀered free vaccinations, but these tend
to happen only in response to an out-
break, not as a means of preventing one.
Firms that sell vaccines complain that
farmers refuse to buy them, hoping that a
government freebie will come along. 
This is a shame. There is no treatment
for goat plague once the virus has taken
hold. The ﬁnancial beneﬁts of eradicating
it far outweigh the costs. According to the
UN, the ﬁrst steps towards getting rid of
the disease in Africa would cost only
$65m each year.
Vaccination can also reduce the likeli-
hood of famine, and the damage it
causes. A farmer with a healthy herd of
goats is less likely to need emergency aid
if his crops fail. As well as being a buﬀer
against hunger, goats and sheep can
provide a way out of poverty, as their
milk and wool can be sold. 

Eradication is possible—with just a bit of help
IN A clearing close to the entrance of
Kenya’s Meru National Park, a bronze
statue of a buﬀalo can be seen standing
on a plinth. Despite the best eﬀorts of
local elephants who occasionally mis-
take it for a real buﬀalo and attack it, it is
there to commemorate the site of the
ﬁnal outbreak of rinderpest, a cattle
disease similar to measles, which was
eradicated in 2011.
Rinderpest has plagued Africa and
other parts of the world ever since cattle
were domesticated. In the 1980s an out-
break, originating in Sudan, killed mil-
lions of bovines across the continent.
Eradication was a triumph of veterinary
medicine, as rinderpest became only the
second disease, either animal or human,
to be wiped out, the ﬁrst being smallpox.
It is exciting, therefore, that a team of
scientists at a research institute in Kenya
think peste des petits ruminants, or “goat
plague”, could be eradicated too, thanks
to their new vaccine. The disease kills up
to 70% of the herds of sheep or goats it
infects, animals vital to the survival of
many of Africa’s poorest people.
“The vaccine was created using a
process called lyophilisation, or freeze-
drying,” says Phil Toye, a scientist who
worked on the goat-plague team at the
International Livestock Research Institute
in Nairobi. Although a vaccine has been
around for years, it goes oﬀ, like milk, if
taken out of the fridge. Vaccinators have
to set up “cold chains”, transporting it to
its destination in cans of liquid nitrogen
between refrigeration units. This is cum-
bersome enough in easy-to-reach places,
and almost impossible in more remote
ones where roads and electricity are
scarce. The new freeze-drying process
creates a thermostable version of the
vaccine which doesn’t deteriorate in hot
climates.

Incurable, but preventable

ly announced that the president, Denis
Sassou-Nguesso, would be one of the ﬁrst
world leaders to meet president-elect Do-
nald Trump in Florida. One TV channel
even showed a fake picture of the pair em-
bracing. A FARA ﬁle showed that the coup
was the work of a Romanian PR ﬁrm, Glo-
bal Structures Group, hired to “improve
Congo’s image abroad”. Sadly for Mr Sas-
sou-Nguesso, after a storm of criticism, the
White House denied that
it had ever
agreed a thing. 
Is operating in Africa worth it? For Bell
Pottinger the answer seems probably not.
But few African countries have as energetic

an opposition or press as South Africa; in
other countries, it is easier to stay in the
shadows. Perhaps the bigger question is
whether it is worth it for the people paying.
Nicholas Cheeseman of the University of
Birmingham reckons that a lot of ﬁrms are
selling snake oil. “I have yet to meet many
consultants [who] actually understand
how African elections work,” he says. Per-
haps the best hope is that they change how
the outcomes are perceived abroad: no
small thing on a continent where cam-
paigns are often bitter and results often dis-
puted. Your correspondent will do his best
to avoid being inﬂuenced. 7

2 oﬃces. Lord Bell, the ﬁrm’s founder (who
left last year), told a magazine that he al-
ways thought the work in South Africa was
“smelly” and that the chief executive must
have known what his ﬁrm was doing.
Western ﬁrms have long oﬀered help to
shady leaders wanting to gild their reputa-
tions overseas. Increasingly, however, they
are being drafted to run domestic political
campaigns too—spreading deft propagan-
da via social media. Bell Pottinger is far
from the only ﬁrm spinning south of the
Sahara. In Kenya, Cambridge Analytica, a
ﬁrm credited with helping Donald Trump
become president, is working to help Presi-
dent Uhuru Kenyatta get re-elected. In Ga-
bon last August, a country with a popula-
tion of less than 2m, your correspondent
encountered no fewer than three ﬁrms
working on the re-election campaign of
President Ali Bongo Ondimba.
This work is lucrative. In America, lob-
bying ﬁrms working for foreign govern-
ments must submit details of their deals
under the Foreign Agents Registration Act
(FARA). These show, for example, how
Moïse Katumbi, an exiled politician from
the Democratic Republic of Congo, paid
$350,000 for the services of Akin, Gump,
Strauss, Hauer & Feld. The Congolese gov-
ernment, too, has its own ﬁrm. FARA re-
turns show that 15 countries have contracts
with American lobbying ﬁrms. There is no
equivalent disclosure in Europe.
The work is also controversial. “Those
who succeed are the ones doing the dark
arts,” says one consultant. Cambridge An-
alytica refuses to say what it is doing this
year in Kenya, but many Kenyans suspect it
is helping to craft a vicious campaign. In
the 2013 Kenyan election, it claims its re-
search made it “able to draft an eﬀective
campaign strategy” for Mr Kenyatta. That
election was widely suspected of having
been rigged. During the campaign Mr Ken-
yatta’s team seemed to suggest, absurdly,
that the British government was planning
to use military force to stop him winning. 
Bell Pottinger is not the only ﬁrm to be
embarrassed. On December 26th last year,
in Congo-Brazzaville, state media jubilant-

Europe

The Economist July 29th 2017 37

Illiberalism in Poland

Objection sustained

W A R S AW

A takeover of the judiciary is halted, but the rule of law is still under threat
FROM the mountain resort of Zakopane
alists.) The party has also radically re-
in the south to the Hel peninsula in the
shaped the Polish state, placing its cronies
north, tens of thousands of Poles took to
in the military, the civil service, state-
the streets last week in protest against pro-
owned companies and the constitutional
posed reforms that would have sacked all
tribunal. If it continues to do so unchecked,
of the members of the Supreme Court and
Poland, once seen as the most promising of
politicised the legal system. In Warsaw
the European Union’s new members, will
thousands marched night after night, hold-
emerge with its democracy weakened and
ing candles and chanting “konstytucja!”
its position in the EU isolated and fragile.
(constitution). Even in the eastern city of
Lublin, where the inhabitants tend to sup-
port the nationalist Law and Justice (PiS)
government, the rallies drew hundreds of
people. By one count, there were protests
in over 220 cities. 
They appear to have worked. On July
24th Andrzej Duda, the president and a
trained lawyer, vetoed two of the three
most controversial 
laws, saying they
“would not strengthen the sense of jus-
tice”. But the threat to the rule of law in Po-
land is far from over. The proposed laws
were only one part of a larger plan devel-
oped by PiS and its increasingly authoritar-
ian chairman, Jaroslaw Kaczynski. 
Since coming to power in November
2015, PiS has consolidated its support
through a combination of unaﬀordable
handouts, nationalist propaganda and
fake news. (Polish state television declared
the protests to be part of a plot to admit
Muslim migrants, and linked them to
George Soros, a Hungarian-Jewish philan-
thropist and bugaboo of European nation-

Unexpected comeback
PiS’s win in 2015 took many by surprise. Al-
though it won only 38% of the vote, it
gained the ﬁrst outright majority of seats in
Poland’s post-communist history. The
party previously led a coalition govern-
ment between 2005 and 2007, but its con-

Respondents with a favourable opinion 
of the European Union, % of total

In the club, showing the love

Source: Pew Research Centre

2010 11

Germany

80

70

60

50

40

30

Poland

Br itain

France

Spain

12

13

14

15

16

17

Also in this section
38 The EU’s Article 7
39 French unions go moderate
40 Turkey’s surreal purges
41 Charlemagne: Beach reading for
Brussels

frontational politics put many Poles oﬀ. So
did its desire for a set of populist reforms
which it calls the “Fourth Republic”. (Poles
think of their current democratic state as
the third in the country’s history.) Accord-
ing to Aleks Szczerbiak of the University of
Sussex, the centre-right Civic Platform
party won the subsequent election by
framing it as “a choice between support for
and opposition to the ‘Fourth Republic’.”
Civic Platform governed for eight large-
ly successful years, but it underestimated a
growing divide between haves and have-
nots, or what locals term “Poland A” and
“Poland B”. The latter is more nationalist,
more populist and less Europhile. Overall,
72% of Poles are favourable towards the EU,
the highest ﬁgure in Europe (see chart 1).
But many have reservations. Fully 48% of
PiS supporters think the EU should hand
back some powers to the national govern-
ment. Young people are more sceptical
than older ones: one poll showed 27% of
18-29 year-olds favour “Polexit”, compared
with 9% of those over 60.
PiS is not openly Eurosceptic, but it ac-
cuses the EU of discriminating against Po-
land in favour of longer-standing mem-
bers, especially Germany. Since accession
in 2004, about 2m Poles have emigrated to
other EU countries, including many of the
more cosmopolitan citizens. That has
helped shift the balance towards PiS’s con-
servative, less urban voters. Although their

1

38 Europe

2

towns have beneﬁted from EU money—Po-
land is the largest recipient of EU structural
funds—they are much poorer than thriving
cities like Warsaw.
The economic divide has helped fuel a
turn towards nationalism. In the country-
side, bumper stickers on cars bear the
“PW” symbol of the Polish home guard in
the second world war, a symbol banned
during the Communist regime. Many peo-
ple express exaggerated fears of Muslim
migrants, although the only immigrants
from outside the EU in most areas are Uk-
rainians. Some 66% of Poles view Muslims
unfavourably, compared with 35% of
Dutch and Swedes. PiS’s rejection of the
EU’s demands to accept a few Syrian refu-
gees plays well with these voters. 

Redoing the foundation
Nationalist support has given Mr Kaczyn-
ski the leeway to try to build his “Fourth
Republic”. Even before the proposed
changes to the judiciary, his government
was accused by the European Commission
of undermining the rule of law by trying to
pack the country’s constitutional tribunal
and refusing to execute its decisions. The
heads of the state-run media outlets have
been replaced by PiS loyalists. The civil ser-
vice has been purged, and the top jobs at
several state-owned companies have gone
to PiS supporters. 
Meanwhile, Mr Kaczynski has made
Polish politics toxic. He spouts conspiracy
theories that the Civic Platform govern-
ment caused the death of his twin brother
Lech, who was president when he died in a
plane crash in 2010 in Smolensk. (On July
18th, he shouted at the opposition in parlia-
ment: “You destroyed him. You murdered
him.”) He launched a hopeless eﬀort to
block Civic Platform’s former leader, Do-
nald Tusk, from being re-elected as presi-
dent of the European Council in March. No
other government went along.
Like its attacks on Civic Platform, PiS’s
judicial reforms seem partly rooted in
paranoia. Mr Kaczynski and his followers
hold to an absurd theory that Poland’s lib-
erals, along with opposition parties and
other institutions, are secretly a continua-
tion of the former communist nomenklat-
ura. A centralised school-reform drive,
which has generated strong resistance,
shows Mr Kaczynski’s authoritarian streak
too. Julia Pitera, a Civic Platform MEP who
has known the PiS leader for three de-
cades, says he was already a critic of the ju-
diciary in the 1990s. “He is clearly irritated
that there is some part of power not subor-
dinate to him,” she says.
PiS argues that its proposed judicial sys-
tem would be little diﬀerent from other
European ones in which justice ministers
can nominate judges. The comparison is
misleading. No European democracy
would let the government sack and replace
the entire supreme court, and the powers

Checks and balances in Europe

Policing the club

What can be done to punish Poland? 
IN THE mid-1990s, as the European
Union began expanding eastwards, its
politicians faced a tricky question. To join
the bloc, countries had to commit to
democratic standards, human rights and
the rule of law. The EU had a lot of le-
verage over aspiring members. But what
if a country turned its back on those
values once it got in?
Article 7 was the EU’s answer. A ver-
sion of it ﬁrst appeared in the Treaty of
Amsterdam in 1999. Governments that
violated the union’s fundamental values
would be threatened with sanctions,
including the suspension of voting rights.
Austria had been one of the most vocal
advocates for introducing Article 7. But in
2000, when Jörg Haider’s far-right Free-
dom Party was included in a coalition
government, it found itself threatened
with the measure it had helped draft. The
EU did not suspend Austria’s voting
rights, but it did impose some (mostly
symbolic) sanctions. They didn’t work,
and Mr Haider remained popular.
After the Haider aﬀair, the EU tweaked
Article 7, adding a warning stage before
sanctions could be imposed. The formal
warning requires a four-ﬁfths majority of
the European Council; it sends a strong
signal that there is a “clear risk of a seri-
ous breach” of EU values. Imposing
sanctions then requires the unanimous

PiS proposes for the justice ministry are far
greater than in other countries. “We have
nothing near
the [political] inﬂuence
which the adopted law would have given
in Poland,” says Werner Kannenberg of
Neue Richtervereinigung, an association
which campaigns for more judicial inde-
pendence in Germany.
PiS also points to low public trust in
courts, some of which are corrupt. Yet

Popular populists

Poland, voting intention, %

Law and Justice

Modern

Kukiz’15

2015

Source: IBRiS

16

17

40

30

Civic
Platform

20

10

0

The Economist July 29th 2017

backing of all member states. 
Ever since Poland’s nationalist Law
and Justice (PiS) party won a narrow
parliamentary majority in 2015 and set
about dismantling checks on its power,
talk of Article 7 has grown. Viktor Orban,
Hungary’s prime minister, who has had
his own brushes with Article 7, has called
the EU’s criticism of Poland an “inquisi-
tion”; he will doubtless veto any attempt
to invoke sanctions. Still, according to
Daniel Kelemen, an expert on EU law at
Rutgers University, merely invoking the
formal warning, an unprecedented step,
would pile the political pressure on PiS. 
On July 26th the European Commis-
sion announced that it will trigger the
ﬁrst part of Article 7 if the Polish govern-
ment resumes eﬀorts to dismiss judges
from its Supreme Court, which it
dropped this week. On the same day, the
commission launched an infringement
procedure against Poland for a third law,
signed by Andrzej Duda, the president,
which gives the government more con-
trol over ordinary courts. Besides in-
voking Article 7, in future the EU could
attach conditions to the aid it gives Po-
land. But it would help if the union’s
national governments spoke out, too. So
far Angela Merkel, Germany’s chancellor,
and Emmanuel Macron, France’s presi-
dent, have barely said a word.

Poles trust their courts more than they do
the government, albeit less than the EU or
the Catholic church. “In almost all post-
communist countries, lower courts are not
models of eﬃciency and transparency,”
points out Kim Lane Scheppele, an expert
on eastern Europe at Princeton University.
Poland’s may need gradual reform, but
they do not need a sudden purge.
They may get one anyway. Although
Mr Duda promised to veto and revise the
two laws concerning higher courts, he
signed a third one giving the government
more control over ordinary courts. The jus-
tice minister will be able to sack their pre-
siding judges. Lower mandatory retire-
ment ages will allow the government to
install more new judges. As for the other
two laws, Mr Duda may simply make “cos-
metic changes”, says Krystian Markiewicz,
the head of the largest judges’ association.
The protests this month might seem en-
couraging to opposition politicians. Yet the
protests strove for political neutrality;
there were virtually no party banners. PiS
is still well ahead in the polls (see chart 2). 
Much of its popularity is due to the so-

1

The Economist July 29th 2017 

2 called “500+” policy. Soon after coming to
power PiS introduced a cash handout to
families (ostensibly to boost birth rates) of
500 zlotys ($137) per month for every child
beyond the ﬁrst one. It is the “ﬁrst time
since the decline of communism that we
have had an eﬀective social policy”, boasts
Zdzislaw Krasnowdebski, a PiS MEP. Un-
surprisingly, the free money is extremely
popular. Poor parts of Poland have grown
visibly wealthier, says Igor Czernecki, who
runs an educational charity for hard-up
children. 
This, along with record-low unemploy-
ment and GDP growth of 4% in the ﬁrst
quarter of this year, has bolstered PiS’s sup-
port. The subsidy may be causing Polish
women to leave the workforce, worsening
a deep gap in labour-force participation.
But that does not worry PiS, which has a
traditional view of the family. Opposition
politicians have belatedly tried to co-opt
the policy. Civic Platform’s leader, Grze-
gorz Schetyna, promises to make the subsi-
dy even more generous. 
For the EU, Poland’s growing illiberal-
ism presents a grave dilemma. It makes a
mockery of the union’s democratic acces-

sion criteria if countries can ignore them
once admitted. The EU can invoke Article 7
of its treaty to punish member states that
violate its fundamental values (see box on
previous page). Frans Timmermans, the
vice-president of the European Commis-
sion, says it will do so if Poland again tries
to limit the independence of its judiciary.
But with Hungary committed to protecting
Poland in the European Council, sanctions
are unlikely. Germany and other member
states hesitate to press the case, for fear of
triggering a nationalist backlash.
So it is up to the Poles to defend the rule
of law. Moderate politicians who hail from
PiS, including Mr Duda, aﬀord some hope:
they are less bewitched by conspiracy the-
ories, and may see less need to impose
party control on the justice system. But it
will be critical to see how the government
treats the president after his vetoes. When
he went on television after announcing
them on July 24th, the state broadcaster
put Beata Szydlo, the prime minister, on at
the same time, as if to undercut him. There
may be some diversity in the party. But as
in any autocratic system, one man, Mr Kac-
zynski, is ultimately in charge. 7

Unions in France

Seasons of discontent

P A R I S

As more moderate unions rise, so does the prospect of labour reform
FRENCH reformists have promised for
The CGT will be cheered by signs that
decades to streamline the country’s
the president’s popularity is sliding. Mr
3,000-page labour code, only to be sty-
Macron’s ﬁnance minister, Bruno Le Maire,
mied by the country’s mighty trade un-
is set on cutting taxes while keeping the ﬁs-
ions. Emmanuel Macron has vowed to
cal deﬁcit under 3%. But that means cuts to
break the jinx, and is likely to face the same
public spending. The chief of the armed
sort of resistance. The conventional wis-
services quit in a huﬀ on July 19th over bud-
dom holds that the showdown will come
get cuts, and civil servants, teachers and re-
in September, once the government pub-
cipients of housing beneﬁts are angry too.
lishes details of its plans. These include
The president’s popularity has fallen by
limiting the ability of courts to order lavish
ten percentage points in the past month, to
compensation for sacked workers, simpli-
54%, according to Ifop, a pollster. That is the
fying worker councils inside ﬁrms and
fastest decline for a new president in two
making it possible to negotiate more issues
decades. 
at the company level rather than in nation-
Supporters of the syndicats (unions)
al sector-wide agreements. Parliament’s
hope to force Mr Macron to repeat the
lower house voted on July 13th to let the
script followed by earlier presidents. Last
government pass the reforms by ordi-
year his predecessor, François Hollande,
nance, without much further debate.
softened planned changes to labour laws
That will let Mr Macron deliver faster
after strikers disrupted railways and barri-
on his promise to free up the jobs market.
caded fuel depots. In 2010 millions of strik-
But his leftist opponents call the process
ers and other demonstrators shut down
undemocratic. Jean-Luc Mélenchon, a far-
schools, the Paris metro, railways and
left leader whose bloc has 17 MPs, calls it a
more, objecting to plans by Nicolas Sar-
“social coup d’état”. He promises big de-
kozy to raise the retirement age. He lost the
monstrations on September 23rd, centred
will for more reforms. Those strikes harked
on Paris. The most hardline union, the
back to even larger mass protests in 1995
Confédération Générale du Travail (CGT),
and, of course, in 1968. 
also vows to make a rumpus.
France is less radical these days. Levels

Europe 39

Have they grown more tractable?

of union membership are lower than in
most of Europe, at about 8% of the work-
force (and only 5% in the private sector).
Strikes are less debilitating than before,
though still worse than elsewhere. The In-
ternational Labour Organisation says over
1m working days were lost to strikes in
France in 2014, to just 155,000 in Germany.
Mr Le Maire argues that French politics
has changed. Unlike his predecessor, Mr
Macron campaigned on labour reform and
a smaller state. Having smashed tradition-
al parties on both the right and left, he has a
unique electoral mandate. His unortho-
dox rise shows he is bold enough to face
down demonstrations.
Others are sanguine, too. “I’m much
more conﬁdent of the government’s ability
than I was in the spring. The prospects for
protests have diminished,” says a com-
pany chief who had earlier predicted un-
ion upheaval. Guy Sorman, a business
pundit, says the labour reforms will be in-
suﬃciently radical, but that unions will
mostly shrug them oﬀ because they main-
ly aﬀect the private sector.
Crucially, the unions themselves are
changing. The government is pinning its
hopes on a better relationship with them:
since June the labour ministry has held at
least 56 meetings with workers and bosses.
The most important is Laurent Berger, head
of the CFDT, a moderate union. This spring
its size passed that of the CGT, which had
been the biggest
labour confederation
since the 19th century.
“France has progressed since the bitter
union clashes of a few years ago,” says Mr
Berger. He wants more consensual labour
relations, like those in Germany. Capping
the maximum severance pay that courts
can impose could be acceptable if the basic
level goes up instead, he says, and he does
not expect to join big protests in Septem-
ber. France’s third-largest union, Force
Ouvrière, has sent similar signals.

1

40 Europe

2

Unions may be growing more concilia-
tory as their membership declines. They
may also fear the government could retali-
ate for strikes by reducing their role in man-
aging public funds for worker training. Mi-
chel Wieviorka, a sociologist, notes that
the CGT has become less uniﬁed than it
once was, and its old political ties with the
Communists are less relevant. And the un-
ions do not see their exhausting clashes
with the government in 2016 as successes.
After “such a gruelling social conﬂict”, says
Stéphane Sirot, a labour expert at l’Univer-
sité de Cergy-Pontoise, it would be hard to
mobilise members on a large scale. Many
workers are open to the message that the
goal of the reforms is to create jobs. The au-
tumn will no doubt bring some sort of con-
frontation, but if Mr Macron can keep Mr
Berger and his allies onside, he has a good
chance to get his reforms through. 7

Turkey’s purges

Absurdity in
power

I S T A N B U L

A mass trial of journalists is surreal
even by Turkish standards
THRONGS of relatives and lawyers
pushed their way past a metal barrier
manned by security guards, ﬁghting for a
spot in the crowded courtroom. The area
where the accused sat was crowded, too.
The 17 journalists whose trial began on July
24th were the core of the editorial staﬀ of
Cumhuriyet, Turkey’s oldest newspaper
and one of the few media outlets that has
refused to play by the rules of Recep Tayyip
Erdogan, the country’s autocratic presi-
dent. In a case widely considered a perver-
sion of justice even by Turkish standards,
they face prison terms of up to 43 years for
“assisting an armed terrorist organisation”.
For one of the accused, Ahmet Sik (pic-
tured on poster), this is far from his ﬁrst
trial. Mr Sik has been a thorn in the side of
the state for decades. In the 1990s he inves-
tigated disappearances in the Kurdish
south-east, torture in prisons and killings
of journalists (including that of a friend,
Metin Goktepe, by police oﬃcers). He was
prosecuted for defaming the military, the
government and individual politicians. In
the 2000s he was one of the ﬁrst to docu-
ment the penetration of Turkey’s security
forces by an Islamist brotherhood known
as the Gulen movement. When he tried to
publish his ﬁndings in 2011, police seized
copies of his book; prosecutors linked to
the Gulenists had him thrown in prison.
He stayed there for over a year. 
At the time, Mr Erdogan’s government,
which had made common cause with the
movement, defended his arrest. “Some-

times a book is more dangerous than a
bomb,” Mr Erdogan said. Mr Sik’s warn-
ings turned out to be prescient. The govern-
ment and the Gulenists fell out in 2013. Gu-
len followers in the army are widely
believed to have spearheaded an attempt-
ed coup in July last year.
Mr Sik’s foresight did not spare him
from Mr Erdogan’s subsequent wrath.
Over 50,000 people have been jailed in the
purges that followed the attempted coup.
In January Mr Sik found himself back in
the same prison where he was held years
ago, joining ten colleagues from Cumhuri-
yet. They are allowed only an hour a week
with their lawyers, says his wife, Yonca
Verdioglu, and the meetings are recorded
by camera and overseen by a guard. Mr Sik
cannot send or receive letters. Absurdly,
the journalists are accused of abetting the
Gulen movement, the very group many of
them helped expose. 
Akin Atalay, the paper’s CEO, who has
spent nearly nine months in detention,
says the trial is intended both to silence
Cumhuriyet and to intimidate others. The
indictment, written in the kind of new-
speak increasingly popular with Turkish
oﬃcials, claims that the Cumhuriyet jour-
nalists prepared the ground for the coup by
turning public opinion against the govern-
ment. A former editor is alleged to have
done so by documenting covert arms ship-
ments to Syrian insurgents by Turkey’s in-
telligence agency. A veteran columnist is
accused of “attempting to create the im-
pression of the existence of an authoritar-
ian government in Turkey”. 
The bulk of the evidence against the
journalists consists of their writing. Many
are accused of corresponding with people
who had downloaded a messaging app
popular with Gulen supporters, known as
ByLock. Simply receiving text messages
from people who subsequently turned out
to be ByLock users is treated as evidence of

The Economist July 29th 2017

guilt. Users of the app have been sacked
and arrested en masse. In a twist no longer
considered out of the ordinary, one of the
prosecutors behind the Cumhuriyet inves-
tigation has turned up as a Gulenist sus-
pect in a separate case.
Ruling-party oﬃcials who once ignored
warnings about the Gulenists now com-
plain that the world does not take their
concerns about the group seriously. They
are not doing themselves any favours. In
recent weeks Turkish police have detained
at least 15 people for wearing T-shirts with
the word “Hero”, on suspicion that this
was a secret message of support for the Gu-
lenists. They have also arrested ten hu-
man-rights activists, including the head of
the Turkish branch of Amnesty Interna-
tional, Idil Eser, and a German national, Pe-
ter Steudtner, on terrorism charges.
That prompted a huge row with Ger-
many. Germany’s foreign ministry warned
against travel to Turkey, proposed freezing
EU assistance and suggested rolling back
credit guarantees to companies doing busi-
ness in Turkey. Oﬃcials in Berlin revealed
that their Turkish counterparts had asked
them to probe nearly 700 German compa-
nies, including Daimler, Siemens and
Volkswagen, for links to terrorist groups.
Turkey has since withdrawn the demand.
Mr Sik’s opening statement at the Cum-
huriyet trial was a blistering counter-indict-
ment of Mr Erdogan, whom he accused of
a “pogrom” against freedom of thought. It
was also an ode to journalism’s power. “I
have managed to oﬀend the judiciary of
every government and of every period,”
he said, continuing: “The irreconcilable
contradiction between us [journalists] and
those who want to drown the truth will
never end.” Observers see the trial as a
chance for the justice system to assert itself
against an authoritarian government. Mrs
Verdioglu sees little hope of that. “There is
no law left in this country,” she says. 7

On tr ial for telling the truth

The Economist July 29th 2017 

Europe 41

Charlemagne

Brussels bookshelf

A summer reading list for Eurocrats

bled it up on publication in 2015). Mr Houllebecq depicts France
under sharia, after a supine political establishment backs a mild
Islamist presidential candidate to keep out the xenophobic Ma-
rine Le Pen. Fortunately, Mr Macron beat her instead. Now the
worst Europeans have to worry about is his tendency to pompos-
ity. Those troubled by his promise of a “Jupiterian” presidency
may want to peruse Robert Graves’s retellings of the Greek
myths. (Though, of course, conﬂating Jupiter and Zeus risks incur-
ring the wrath of the scholar-president.) A copy of Charles de
Gaulle’s war memoirs might also come in handy, if best enjoyed
on an e-reader: the collected edition weighs in at 1,056 pages.
Some Eurocrats will spend their holidays obsessing over the
increasingly illiberal democracies of Poland and Hungary. Once
they have consigned to memory the full wording of Article 7 of
the EU treaty, they can turn to Tony Judt’s “Europe: The Grand Illu-
sion”. This short, pessimistic take on the EU’s future was pub-
lished in 1996, just as Western European leaders were drawing up
plans for a common currency and enlargement to include the
freshly liberated countries of the east. Today, with east-west frac-
tures growing along several dimensions, some will see vindica-
tion in Judt’s warning that the EU could not hope both to main-
tain its values and to spread them eastwards. 
Others will see that as an unfair slur on those eastern coun-
tries that have slotted smoothly into the European family. Better
to concentrate on books that can help Europe navigate a world
troubled by strongmen such as Vladimir Putin and Recep Tayyip
Erdogan, and mercurial leaders such as Donald Trump. Here the
classics oﬀer fresh inspiration. Suetonius’s “The Twelve Caesars”
warns of the dangers posed by greedy, nepotistic political elites to
themselves and others, and will console those who value the
rule of law. Failing that, there is always Shakespeare.
What about Brexit-watchers? One EU oﬃcial cheekily sug-
gests they pack a box set of “Star Trek: Deep Space Nine”, set on an
outpost at the edge of the civilised universe. For the long view,
add the late Hugo Young’s “This Blessed Plot”, the best chronicle
of Britain’s historical agonies over Europe. Another option might
be Voltaire’s “Candide”: Theresa May’s government often seems
to be inﬂuenced by Dr Pangloss, ﬁnding cause for cheer amid ca-
tastrophe. The qualities of some of Mrs May’s ministers, mean-
while, are captured well by Roger Hargreaves’s series of ultra-
slim paperbacks, the Mr Men. Charlemagne recommends Mr
Muddle, Mr Daydream and Little Miss Whoops. Readers can de-
cide for themselves which cabinet members each resembles.

You have to want to change
Books can help with the business of Brussels, too. EU antitrust of-
ﬁcials battling American tech giants can gird their loins with
Dave Eggers’s “The Circle,” a glimpse into a dystopian future
where the tentacles of social media extend into every facet of per-
sonal life. Colleagues preparing for the gathering scandal over
possible collusion among German carmakers (see page 50) might
try JG Ballard’s classic of psychotic autophilia, “Crash”.
One ﬁnal suggestion for Europe’s bookworms. Mr Macron’s
ascent has revived conﬁdence that Europe can ﬁnally solve pe-
rennial problems like the euro’s half-built architecture, or the EU’s
asylum system. “If we want things to stay as they are, things will
have to change,” warns a Sicilian nobleman in Giuseppe di Lam-
pedusa’s “The Leopard,” a study of 19th-century aristocracy in de-
cline. For Europeans jolted out of complacency by the shocks of
the last few years, that familiar line ﬁnally resonates. 7

“HOW hard it is to escape from places,” Katherine Mansﬁeld,
an author from New Zealand, once wrote to a friend. She
had a point, but long paid holidays and low-cost airlines do help.
To judge by the tumbleweed blowing through the oﬃces and
halls of Brussels this week, the wallahs of the European Union
have not found ﬂeeing town too much of a wrench.
Recent summers have been marred by crises perfectly timed
to ruin oﬃcials’ holiday plans. In despair at the turn Europe
seemed to be taking, some turned to gloomy tomes by Joseph
Roth or Stefan Zweig to explain the atavistic nationalism they
feared was taking hold. This year’s vacationers leave town in
brighter spirits. Relieved from concerns over the EU’s imminent
collapse, many will indulge in chick lit or crime novels, to be
devoured and discarded as swiftly as the latest Greek economic
forecast. But for those looking to understand the current Euro-
pean moment, Charlemagne oﬀers an alternative reading guide.
Two years ago visitors to some Aegean islands found them-
selves sharing beaches with thousands of refugees streaming
across from Turkey. This year they are less likely to bear witness to
Europe’s immigration problem: there are fewer arrivals, and most
are rescued at sea before being brought to Italy by coastguards or
NGOs. That gives our readers time to hold their noses and dip into
“Camp of the Saints”, a revoltingly racist French book from the
1970s (strapline: “A chilling novel about the end of the white
world”) that describes a European surrender before third-world
immigrants bearing names like Turd-Eater who descend upon
Mediterranean shores in their hundreds of thousands. The novel
is known only to nerdish nationalists; Stephen Bannon, Donald
Trump’s consigliere, is a fan. Yet one hears echoes of its apocalyp-
ticism in the forecasts of some Europeans that Africa’s high birth
rates and weak labour markets guarantee an endless stream of
migrants heading Europe’s way. Migration experts say this is un-
likely, so a cheap fantasy novel may be just the place for it.
The man most responsible for this year’s sunny European
mood is Emmanuel Macron. Fans of France’s new president may
have been spooked by his early wobbles on tax policy and a spat
with the military top brass. If so, they might remind themselves
of how lucky they are by revisiting Michel Houellebecq’s “Sub-
mission” (any serious follower of French politics will have gob-

42

Br itain

The Economist July 29th 2017

Also in this section
43 The Charlie Gard case
44 Schools that teach parents
44 Old politicians
45 Bagehot: Ruth Davidson, the Tor ies’
northern star

The car industr y

Mini boost, major problems

BMW announces a welcome investment. But the road ahead looks bumpy
BRITAIN’S car industry has been running
The worry is that Brexit will make for-
at high revs. Over 1.7m vehicles rolled
eign ﬁrms think again. The oﬃcial line
oﬀ production lines last year, the most
from Toyota, Nissan, Honda and most oth-
since 1999. If growth continued at recent
er carmakers is that they will wait for the
rates, the all-time record of 1.9m, set in 1972,
outcome of the negotiations in Brussels
would be broken within a couple of years.
next autumn. Businessfolk report
that
On July 25th BMW, which owns the Mini
since she lost her majority in an election in
brand, announced that it would build an
June, Theresa May has become more will-
all-electric model of the compact car in Ox-
ing to listen to them. The cabinet seems at
ford from 2019, rather than making it in the
last to have recognised that a transition
Netherlands, as it had threatened in the
period will be necessary after Britain
leaves the EU in March 2019. But the coun-
wake of the Brexit referendum.
Yet the mood among British carmakers
try is still heading for a “hard Brexit”, leav-
ing the EU’s single market. And the instabil-
is a mixture of nervousness and gloom. In
spite of BMW’s announcement, few feel re-
ity of Mrs May’s minority government
assured about the long-term future of the
could yet lead to no deal at all.
industry. Indeed, some fear that last year’s
The uncertainty has already taken a toll.
vote to leave the European Union could
Investment
in carmaking plunged to
run them oﬀ the road. 
£322m ($406m) in the ﬁrst half of 2017, com-
Manufacturers are aware that it was
pared with £1.7bn in all of 2016 and £2.5bn
joining the EU that helped to rescue car-
in 2015. Production has dipped. One boss
making in Britain. The amalgamation of
thinks the chances of getting special single-
various car brands under British Leyland
market access for cars, as Mrs May once
had been a catastrophe. Competition was
hinted that she wanted, are “zero”. Mike
stiﬂed, investment faltered and labour re-
Hawes of the SMMT, an industry body,
lations soured to the extent that managers
says that even if there is a deal it is certain to
straying onto the shop ﬂoor had to dodge
be on worse terms than the current one.
ﬂying bolts. Production plunged until Japa-
In the worst-case scenario, with no
nese carmakers, led by Honda in 1979,
trade deal reached, World Trade Organisa-
sought a base for exporting to Europe. Brit-
tion rules would mean tariﬀs of 10% on ve-
ain’s accession in 1973 to what was then
hicles and 4.5% on parts. That would hurt:
known as the EEC gave such ﬁrms access to
the average British-made car has 60% of its
a giant market. Britain’s ﬂexible labour
components imported from the EU; some
laws and engineering expertise were add-
parts travel several times between Britain
ed enticements.
and Europe during a car’s manufacture.

For daily analysis and debate on Br itain, visit
Economist.com/br itain

Overcoming tariﬀs would be diﬃcult
for mass-market carmakers, says Mr
Hawes. Margins in Europe average 5-10%.
Heavy investment has made most plants
in Britain highly eﬃcient, so there is little
scope to cut costs. One hope is that ﬁrms
are willing to gamble that Brexit will bring
a permanent devaluation of sterling to oﬀ-
set tariﬀs; since the referendum, the pound
has fallen by 15% against the euro.
Yet tariﬀs may not be the worst pro-
blem. The introduction of customs con-
trols would hold up the ﬂow of parts
across the English Channel in a way that
hampered factories’ planning. Wafer-thin
inventories keep costs down. Stocks of
many parts cover just half a day of produc-
tion, so a predictable ﬂow is vital. Some de-
liveries to Nissan’s plant in Sunderland are
scheduled to within 15-minute time slots.
Allowing for customs inspections would
mean keeping bigger stocks, at higher cost. 
Will other carmakers follow BMW and
invest in Britain despite these snags? BMW
is not the only one to have announced new
projects since the referendum. In October
Nissan said it would make the next genera-
tion of its Qashqai and X-Trail SUVs in Sun-
derland. In March Toyota said it would in-
vest £240m in a factory in the Midlands.
Brexiteers cite these as evidence that the in-
dustry will rumble on regardless.
That is optimistic. One reason for the re-
cent investments is that the timescale of
the car industry is long: ﬁve years may pass
between inception of a new model and
production, so decisions are taken far in
advance. Nissan had intended to invest in
Sunderland for some time. BMW’s other
option, in the Netherlands, would have
meant using a contract manufacturer rath-
er than a BMW-owned factory—a risky op-
tion for an important model.
And making a new version of an exist-
ing model—such as the electric Mini—

1

The Economist July 29th 2017 

2 makes sense if a factory is already churn-
ing out cars of that variety. When it comes
to building all-new models from scratch,
carmakers may be more likely to look over-
seas. There is already a hint of that in
BMW’s plans. Although the Minis will be
assembled in Oxford, the batteries and
motors, containing all the clever new tech-
nology, will be developed in Germany.
Another factor in the post-referendum
announcements is intensive lobbying by
the government. Nissan and Toyota re-
ceived unspeciﬁed “assurances” from min-
isters that their commitments would not
leave them out of pocket after Brexit. The
government has declined to say exactly
what was promised; whatever it was, it is
unlikely that there will be enough of it to
go round for every prospective investor,
nor every industry, nor indeﬁnitely.
Some factories face more immediate
peril. The takeover in March of Opel,
which makes Vauxhalls in Britain, by
France’s PSA Group could be bad news for
Vauxhall’s workers. PSA will look for costs
to cut to justify the takeover, and Vaux-

Charlie Gard

Peace at last

hall’s two factories could be on the list.
Not all carmakers would quit. As Andy
Palmer, the boss of Aston Martin, points
out, his expensive luxury sports-cars are
not for the price-sensitive. The same is true
of Rolls-Royce, also owned by BMW, Bent-
ley, owned by Volkswagen, and McLaren.
Jaguar Land Rover, Britain’s biggest car-
maker, exports just 20% of its output to the
EU. The domestic market is big enough to
sustain some local production. 
Nonetheless, hefty tariﬀs would cause
a “slow, inexorable migration”, says Nick
Oliver at the University of Edinburgh Busi-
ness School. Even a deal that reduced or
abolished them would damage competi-
tiveness. Carmakers would ﬁnd it harder
to source parts as the network of domestic
suppliers shrank with the rest of the indus-
try. And without big investments in new
technologies such as electric power and
self-driving, British assembly plants would
become more reliant on imported compo-
nents. Car crashes happen in the blink of
an eye. Brexit could have a slow-motion
impact that will be no less harmful. 7

A fraught case over the care of a desperately ill baby comes to a close
AFTER ﬁve months of agonising court
Nicholas Francis, ruled that GOSH could
battles, on July 24th the parents of
stop providing life-support treatment. The
Charlie Gard, an 11-month-old boy suﬀer-
Court of Appeal, the Supreme Court and
ing from a rare genetic disorder, ended
the European Court of Human Rights each
their ﬁght to keep their son alive. They had
upheld the decision.
wanted to take him to America to receive
A neurologist at Columbia University,
an experimental treatment that his doctors
Michio Hirano, oﬀered to carry out the ex-
in Britain argued was not in his interests.
perimental treatment and Charlie’s par-
The case has raised intense debate around
ents crowd-funded £1.3m ($1.7m) to pay for
the world about the limits of the power of
it. The pope and Donald Trump voiced
parents and the state. 
Charlie suﬀers from encephalomyo-
pathic mitochondrial DNA depletion syn-
drome, a condition that causes the body’s
cells and then its organs to shut down. It
has resulted in severe brain damage. He is
unable to breathe unaided. His doctors at
Great Ormond Street hospital (GOSH) in
London say that, as far as they can tell, he
has no awareness.
Connie Yates and Chris Gard, his par-
ents, wanted him to receive nucleoside by-
pass therapy, which they believed could re-
pair his damaged DNA. No one with
Charlie’s condition has ever received it. His
doctors argued that he had suﬀered irre-
versible neurological damage and any
chance of the therapy helping had passed.
They said he should instead receive pallia-
tive care. Doctors providing second opin-
ions agreed. In April a judge, Mr Justice

A life’s work

Br itain 43

their support; Congress granted the baby
residence in America. The ruling, however,
stopped these oﬀers being taken up.
The case returned to court to examine
new evidence about the potential of the
therapy, but on July 24th the court heard
that, after seeing scans of Charlie’s brain,
Dr Hirano had said he was no longer will-
ing to carry out the treatment, and so Char-
lie’s parents ended their legal ﬁght. In a
statement, GOSH said that Dr Hirano had
been invited to examine the baby months
earlier but had not done so; nor had he
viewed previous scans, read all of Char-
lie’s notes or the original judgment. 
Hospital staﬀ have received death
threats. Mr Justice Francis lamented the in-
terventions by “those who know almost
nothing about this case but who feel enti-
tled to express opinions.” Mike Pence,
America’s vice-president, had said that
Charlie’s was “a story of single-payer
health care”. He and others decried the
judge’s decision as evidence of the ration-
ing of care by Britain’s state-funded Na-
tional Health Service. Yet the judgment
was made not on the basis of the cost of the
treatment—which the parents were willing
to fund themselves if needed—but on the
basis of what was in the interests of a pa-
tient who could not decide for himself.
In Britain adults have the right to con-
sent to experimental therapies with little
chance of success, just as they may refuse
treatment. If doctors do not deem a treat-
ment to be in a patient’s interests they may
refuse to give it, but a court cannot prevent
an adult from seeking (and paying for) such
care elsewhere. In the cases of children or
others who lack the capacity to decide for
themselves and have not previously made
their wishes clear, courts can overrule the
wishes of families.
In America courts have been reluctant
to go against parents’ requests for treat-
ment, even when the chance of success is
vanishingly small, says Dominic Wilkin-
son of Oxford University. That can mean
doctors having to provide care which they
think is against the interests of their pa-
tient. Under Texas’s “futile care law”, if
medics feel that a treatment requested by a
family will be of no beneﬁt they can go be-
fore an ethics committee. If the committee
agrees that the treatment is futile, the fam-
ily may seek another doctor to provide it,
within a time limit. In the Canadian prov-
ince of Ontario a tribunal hears cases
where doctors challenge families’ deci-
sions. It often rules in favour of clinicians.
Disagreements between parents and
doctors over end-of-life decisions involv-
ing children are uncommon. One Dutch
study suggested that they occur in about
10% of cases involving severely ill babies.
Even then, in all those instances, consen-
sus was eventually reached. Cases that
reach a court are the exceptions. They are,
by their nature, the hardest of all. 7

44 Br itain

Education

New tricks

Schools increasingly teach parents, too
LESSONS start early at John Perryn, a state
primary school in west London. From
the day children arrive, parents are
brought in for classes on how to teach pho-
nics and even how to play (counting sand-
castles helps the tiddlers grasp numbers,
for example). As children get older, the
workshops become more formal. All ses-
sions are voluntary. But parents who at-
tend win points for their child’s house—
and the top house wins a cinema trip at the
end of term.
It is an increasingly common approach.
Schools with pupils from troubled families
have long had little choice but to care
about what goes on at home (and the pres-
sure is rising with cuts to social services
and mental-health support). But they and
others often now look to make a diﬀerence
before things reach breaking point. 
New interventions range from the con-
ﬁscation of video-game consoles belong-
ing to naughty children to programmes to
improve the literacy of parents. The Educa-
tion Endowment Foundation, a govern-
ment-funded charity, has run trials to im-
prove parental engagement in 133 schools.
Part of the explanation for the focus on
parents is that poverty is no longer seen as
a good excuse for bad exam performance,
says Barnaby Lenon, author of “Much Pro-
mise”, a book on English schools. Since
much of the gap between rich and poor pu-
pils emerges in the home, schools see
changing parents’ behaviour as a way to
boost pupils from poor families. That is
true at John Perryn, where half of pupils
qualify for funding top-ups for low-earn-
ing families. Many arrive aged three with
the vocabulary of a child half that age, says
Branwen Hywel, the school’s head.
There is plenty of evidence that parents
make a diﬀerence. One recent analysis
published by the Social Market Founda-
tion, a think-tank, unsurprisingly found
that children whose parents read to them,
make sure they do their homework and
turn up to parents’ evening do better in ex-
ams aged 11. Yet how to encourage parents
to get involved is less clear. A report from
the Nuﬃeld Foundation, another think-
tank, looked at 68 studies designed to im-
prove engagement. None conclusively
showed a positive impact on results.
It is nevertheless too soon to write oﬀ
such eﬀorts, says Stephen Gorard, one of
the Nuﬃeld report’s authors. The most
promising interventions brought parents,
young children and teachers together; the

The Economist July 29th 2017

Gerontocracy

The pensioners’ parliament

Watch out, whips: today’s MPs are older—and more rebellious—than ever
FOR the ﬁrst time in a generation a
groundswell of youthful enthusiasm
is gripping British politics. A high turnout
among the under-25s helped to rob the
government of its majority in June. But it
had another, curious outcome: the young
voters ended up electing the oldest crop
of MPs and party leaders in decades.
Sir Vince Cable, a sprightly 74-year-
old, was crowned leader of the Liberal
Democrats on July 20th after Tim Farron,
a whippersnapper of 47, stepped down.
Sir Vince joins Theresa May (60) and
Jeremy Corbyn (68) to complete a trio of
senior citizens at the heart of Westmin-
ster. With a combined age of 203, the
three main parties’ leaders are the oldest
since 1954, when an 80-year-old Winston
Churchill led the Tories. None is long in
the job, but history suggests they should
make the most of it. Since 1960 the aver-
age tenure of party leaders appointed in
their 60s has been two-and-a-half years,
against eight years for those under 50.
Across Westminster, MPs are greying.
The current crop has an average age of 51,
which makes it the oldest, by a whisker,

of the past ten parliaments. In the 1992
election—the last time the youth turnout
was as high as it was this June—only three
candidates aged over 70 were elected.
This year there were 28.
That might spell trouble for the whips,
because older MPs tend to be more rebel-
lious. During sittings of the 2010 and 2015
parliaments, MPs aged 65 and over were
twice as likely as their younger col-
leagues to vote against the party line.
They may be less anxious for promotion.
They also have more room for manoeu-
vre, enjoying majorities in their constitu-
encies that are 17% higher, on average,
than those of other MPs.
With 18 years’ experience in the Com-
mons Sir Vince, who was previously
chief economist at Royal Dutch Shell, is a
relative novice among his septuagenar-
ian colleagues. The current “Father of the
House” is Kenneth Clarke, a 77-year-old
Tory who made his debut in 1970. The
two share a fondness for Europe. Sir
Vince argues for an “exit from Brexit”
after the Article 50 negotiations. Perhaps
old oaks can seed new debates. 

Ancien régime

Br itain, leaders of major political par ties, age at star t of term

Labour

Conser vative

Liberal Democrat*

GENERAL ELECT IONS

Average age
of leaders

Foot

Callaghan

Thatcher

Heath
Wilson (since 1963)

Thorpe

Steel

Ashdown

Kinnock

Cable

Campbell

Corbyn

Howard

May

Brown

Duncan
Smith

Smith

Major

Clegg

Farron

Blair

Kennedy
Hague

Cameron

Miliband

75

70

65

60

55

50

45

40

35

1965

70

75

80

85

90

95

2000

05

10

15 17

Sources: House of Commons Librar y; The Economist

*Liberal Par ty before 1988

least eﬀective ones merely urged parents to
do more. Involving parents, some of
whom have had a bad experience of edu-
cation, may have the additional beneﬁt of
making school a less threatening place for
their children, he says.
The main barrier to success is getting
parents on board. One American study in
2015 found that paying parents to attend
training, to make sure homework was
completed and for their children’s good
test results led to better outcomes. English
schools have tried other ways to get par-
ents through the door. One in east London

seeks to build trust by ﬁrst helping them
with issues like visas and health problems.
Others notify parents of forthcoming tests
with texts or e-mails. 
For now, English children can be grate-
ful that schools have not gone as far as their
counterparts in Japan. There, notes Lucy
Crehan of the Education Development
Trust, a consultancy, children sometimes
come home for the holidays with detailed
instructions regarding when they should
wake up and how much exercise they
ought to get. By contrast, the summer holi-
day is still a time for rest in England. 7

The Economist July 29th 2017 

Bagehot

Northern star

Br itain 45

Ruth Davidson is an antidote to much that is wrong with the Conservative Party

party fought this year’s election on an interesting manifesto
which tried to deﬁne the role of the nation-state in a volatile and
globalised world. But Mrs May proved incapable of explaining it.
And then the entire thing blew up because of an ill-thought-out
section on paying for elderly care. Since then the party has been
out of ideas. Mrs May lacks the ability to craft a new philosophy.
Ministers can’t ﬁll the void because they are bound by collective
responsibility. The result is drift and factional inﬁghting. Jeremy
Corbyn, Labour’s hard-left leader, sets the agenda because he at
least has something to say; the Tories obsess over who should
lead them because they have nothing to say. 
Ms Davidson is well-positioned to ﬁll this void. She is not
bound by cabinet responsibility nor subject to whipping (she is a
member of the Scottish Parliament, not the House of Commons).
But she also possesses the authority of a politician who has
fought several elections and two referendum campaigns in the
past ﬁve years. And she has plenty to say: in an article for a new
website, UnHerd, she proposes a radical reboot of capitalism.
Ms Davidson starts oﬀ with a paradox: the world as a whole
has never been richer but the consensus for free markets has nev-
er been more fragile. The reason for this is that the very process
that has enriched the emerging world—globalisation—has hol-
lowed out the old industrial world. Young Britons face a dismal
prospect. If they stay in their home towns, they can’t ﬁnd any
jobs. If they move to the big city, they can’t aﬀord anywhere to
live. The very least the Tories can do is to address the housing pro-
blem. But they need to go much further: attacking crony capital-
ism, even if it means biting the hand that feeds them, closing tax
havens and breaking up over-mighty companies. 
Ms Davidson’s ideas are sketchy. She doesn’t say anything
about the ﬁnancial crisis, which precipitated the current era of
stagnation, or address Britain’s lousy record on productivity. It
nevertheless points in the right direction: if the Tories aren’t will-
ing to take on their own constituents, particularly in the business
world, they will deliver the country to Mr Corbyn. Ms Davidson
says that she will have much more to say in the future. Having
been immersed in day-to-day politics for years she wants to
spend more time thinking big thoughts. 

Tae think again
She is inevitably dogged by the leadership question: has she any
plans to run for a seat in Westminster and make a bid to succeed
Mrs May? A growing number of Tories see her as a saviour, believ-
ing that, given the party’s toxic reputation with the young, the
only chance it has of reviving its fortunes is to choose a leader
who is young and diﬀerent. Ms Davidson retorts that she is com-
pletely focused on building the party in Scotland and eventually
replacing Nicola Sturgeon as ﬁrst minister.
This is not just spin. Abandoning the leadership of the Scottish
Conservatives for a seat in Westminster would not only be a gam-
ble for Ms Davidson personally but would also reinforce the Scot-
tish National Party’s claim that the local Tories are no more than
the tail of the English dog. But remaining in Scotland doesn’t pre-
vent her from helping to reshape the national party. The Tories
need to decide what they stand for if they are to have any chance
of acting as an eﬀective government or holding back the tide of
Corbynism. They also need to deﬁne themselves if they are not to
be deﬁned by their enemies. Ms Davidson’s brand of Conserva-
tism—open but pragmatic, forward-looking and ﬂexible—is exact-
ly what the party needs. 7

THERE are lots of good arguments for devolution, such as
bringing power closer to the people and providing a voice for
cultural minorities. But one of the best is that it increases the sup-
ply of talent, not just in terms of quantity but also variety. Ruth
Davidson, the leader of the Scottish Conservative Party, is as good
an example of this as you can get: both a standing indictment of
the current state of her party in the south and proof that there is
still hope for Conservatism.
Ms Davidson is the polar opposite of Theresa May. Most obvi-
ously she is a winner: under her leadership the Scottish Tories in-
creased their number of MPs from one to 13 while Mrs May lost
her overall majority. Mrs May is mind-bogglingly inarticulate for
someone who has been in politics all her life—all formulaic
phrases and woolly banalities. Ms Davidson is a great talker.
But the most important contrast is not between Ms Davidson
and Mrs May, who is on the way out, but between Ms Davidson
and the Conservative Party as a whole. The party often seems to
be out of touch with modern Britain. Several cabinet members
might have been frozen in the 1950s. Jacob Rees-Mogg, a back-
bencher who is being touted as a future leader by the party’s ka-
mikaze wing, might have been frozen in the 1850s. 
By contrast, Ms Davidson is a citizen of modern Britain. Her fa-
ther lost his job in a textile mill in one of the endless downsizings
that have left industrial Scotland a hollow shell. She went to
what she describes as a “proper comprehensive” in Fife with
1,500 pupils of varying abilities. Much is made by proﬁle writers
of the fact that she is both a lesbian and a kick-boxer (though in
fact she gave up kick-boxing years ago). Just as important in deﬁn-
ing her as a modern citizen is that, at 38, she is only now getting
round to buying her ﬁrst house with her partner.
Because it is so out of touch, the Tory party can seem frivolous.
Politics is a game played by chums who have known each other
since school or Oxbridge and spend their lives alternately kniﬁng
each other and making up. Though not as dour as Gordon Brown,
Ms Davidson exudes an admirable disdain for such southern de-
cadence. She points out that these are serious times: Britain is in
danger of crashing out of the European Union and a dangerous
populist tide is rising across the West. 
The Conservative high-command is intellectually dead. The

46

International

The Economist July 29th 2017

Demography

The rise of childlessness 

T O K Y O

More adults in the rich world are not having children. That is no reason to panic
POCKET LIVING has been building and
are updating a long tradition. 
selling small ﬂats in London since 2005.
In some European countries, such as
The ﬂats have many of the things that
Germany and Italy, the overall birth rate is
young, single people want, such as bicycle
low and childlessness is common. But oth-
storage, and lack the things they do not,
er countries, such as Britain and Ireland,
such as large kitchens and lots of book-
combine a high birth rate (by European
shelves. At ﬁrst, Pocket expected that most
standards) with a high rate of childless-
buyers would be in their late 20s, says
ness. And in still other countries, especial-
Marc Vlessing, the ﬁrm’s boss. Instead the
ly formerly communist ones in eastern Eu-
average age is 32, and rising. It is not that
rope, childlessness is rare but birth rates are
many buyers are yet to have children, spec-
low, because many women have one
ulates Mr Vlessing; rather, they probably
child. Overall, there is surprisingly little
will never have them. 
A growing number of city-dwelling
Europeans are in the same situation. Just
9% of English and Welsh women born in
1946 had no children. For the cohort born
in 1970—who, barring a few late surprises,
can be assumed to be done with babies—
the proportion is 17%. In Germany 22% of
women reach their early 40s without chil-
dren; in Hamburg 32% do. 
All of which might seem to suggest that
Europe is bent on self-erasure. Childless-
ness is “a symptom of a feeble and termi-
nally ill culture” that has lost touch with its
heritage, according to Iben Thranholm, a
conservative Danish journalist. The sug-
gestion is misleading, however. Mass
childlessness is not a sign of demographic
collapse, nor is it remotely novel. It would
be more accurate to say that rich countries

Norway
Slovak Republic
Ireland
Norway
Sweden
France (metropolitan)
Denmark
Denmark
Hungar y
Czech Republic
Poland
Estonia
Finland
England and Wales
Belgium
Slovenia
Croatia
Netherlands
Por tugal
Greece
Romania
Romania
Austr ia Switzerland
Germany
Spain
Italy

Childless women, as % of total
Source: Tomas Sobotka, “Childlessness in Europe”

Europe, childlessness and average number
of children, for women born in 1968

Lithuania
Belarus
Bulgar ia

All over the map

Scandinavia

e
b

m

u
n
e
g
a

r

Western

Eastern

Central

Russia

n
e

r

d

l
i

h

c

2.0

2.2

1.8

1.6

1.4

e
v

A

f

o

r

1

5

10

15

20

25

correlation between childlessness and fer-
tility (see chart 1). 
Many countries that have lots of child-
less women today had even higher rates in
the early 20th century. Indeed, the baby-
ﬁlled late 20th century looks like a blip (see
chart 2 on next page). That reﬂects deep-
rooted social norms. In pre-industrial
western Europe, men and women did not
marry while they were maids or appren-
tices, but only when they could set up
households of their own. To stay unmar-
ried and childless was a sign of economic
failure. But it was not shameful in itself. “It
is poverty only which makes celibacy con-
temptible,” explained the heroine of Jane
Austen’s novel, “Emma”. 
The attitude lingers. In western Ger-
many, people without children tend to feel
only mild social stigma. “It’s something
that requires an explanation, but not a
lengthy one,” says Tanja Kinkel, a success-
ful novelist who did not have children be-
cause she did not ﬁnd a suitable partner.
And western Germany combines a forgiv-
ing attitude to childlessness with a harsh
view of working mothers. Until recently,
nurseries were rare; a woman who put her
child in one might be abused as a “Raben-
mutter” (raven mother). Many happily
working women simply opt out. 
Childlessness is becoming more com-
mon in countries like Italy and Spain,
which also squeeze working mothers. But
perhaps the best example is Japan. Even if
Japanese mothers were not pressed to stop
working (which they are) they would be
pushed into it by a brutal oﬃce culture. In a
Japanese ﬁrm everybody is responsible for
everything, complains one woman, an ar-
chitect who lives in Tokyo. As a result, no-
body dares to leave work early, which 

1

 
 
 
The Economist July 29th 2017 

2 makes parenthood almost impossible. She
delayed having children and is undergoing
fertility treatment at the age of 41. Japan’s
childless rate has shot up from 11% for
women born in 1953 to 27% for women
born in 1970. 
The reasons why people do not have
children are varied, complex and often
overlapping. A few (but, pollsters ﬁnd, not
many) never wanted them. Others do not
meet the right person. Some fall in love
with people who already have children,
and feel satisﬁed. Others suﬀer from medi-
cal problems. A great many fall into a
group that Ann Berrington, a demogra-
pher at the University of Southampton,
calls “perpetual postponers”. Waiting to
start a family until they are ﬁnished with
education, until they have a stable job and
a house, they ﬁnd it is too late. 
Almost everywhere, the most educated
women are least likely to have children.
And the highest rates of childlessness are
found among women who pursue degrees
in non-vocational subjects. Researchers at
Stockholm University have found that 33%
of Swedish women born in the late 1950s
who studied the social sciences did not
have children, compared with 10% of prim-
ary-school teachers and just 6% of mid-
wives. It may be that teaching and mid-
wifery attract women who strongly desire
children, or that these jobs oﬀer more par-
ent-friendly hours and conditions. But the
diﬀerence is probably also down to job se-
curity. A trained teacher can expect to ﬁnd
a stable job at a younger age than a trained
anthropologist can.

The charitable childless
Although childlessness makes some peo-
ple utterly miserable, that is not the case for
most. One multi-country study by two de-
mographers, Rachel Margolis and Mikko
Myrskyla, suggests that childless people
aged 40 and over in formerly communist
eastern Europe are a little unhappier than
people with children, once you control for
things like wealth and marital status. That
might reﬂect the stigma against childless-
ness in those countries. In liberal Anglo-
Saxon countries, though, middle-aged
childless people appear to be slightly hap-
pier than parents. The same demographers
ﬁnd that young parents are gloomier than
childless youngsters. 
Amazing as it may seem to parents who
spend their evenings and weekends traips-
ing to football training and piano lessons,
childless people ﬁnd plenty of things to do
with their time. Among these are good
works. One German study found that 42%
of charitable foundations were created by
childless people. Ms Kinkel started a chari-

Internship: The Economist is looking for an intern to
work on our news desk. The position is based in London
and the pay is £2,000 a month. The deadline is August
13th. Full details of how to apply are available at
economist.com/newsintern

Not so hot on tots

Childless women, as % of total, by year of bir th

2

Germany
United States

Spain

England and Wales
Sweden

30

25

20

15

10

5

0

1900 10

20

30

40

50

60

72

Sources: Tomas Sobotka; Tomas Frejka

ty called Bread and Books, which operates
mostly in Africa. She describes it as her
way of nurturing the next generation. 
People without children are far more
likely to bequeath money to charity, points
out Russell James, an expert on philanthro-
py at Texas Tech University. In 2014 fully
48% of married childless people aged at
least 55 who had written wills or will-like
documents committed to giving some-
thing to charity. That was true of only 12%
of parents and a mere 8% of grandparents.
Knowing this, American universities have
become acutely interested in whether
their alumni have oﬀspring, says Mr James. 
That question is easier to answer for
women than for men. Men’s fertility de-
clines with age, but less predictably than
women’s fertility. So, whereas demogra-
phers and fundraisers can reasonably as-
sume that a 45-year-old woman will have
no more children, they cannot assume the
same for a man. Worse, men sometimes
forget their children when ﬁlling in census
forms—and may have fathered children
they do not know about. Still, two things
are clear. Childless men are numerous, and
quite diﬀerent from childless women. 
Men are erratic. Some are reproductive
prodigies, having many children with
more than one partner. Others—more than
is the case for women—have none at all. Ms
Berrington ﬁnds that 22% of British men
born in 1958 were childless at the age of 46,
compared with 16% of women. And in
many countries childless men are dispro-
portionately working class. French men
who have never worked are about twice as
likely to have no children as men who hold
good white-collar jobs. Michaela Kreyen-
feld, a demographer at the Hertie School of
Governance in Berlin, ﬁnds that 36% of
west German men without university de-
grees born in the early 1970s were childless
in their early 40s. Among men with de-
grees, the rate was 28%. 
That suggests men and women end up
childless for quite diﬀerent reasons. Wom-
en often have no children because they
have prioritised education or work in their
20s and 30s. Men are more likely to remain

International 47

childless because women do not view
them as good boyfriend material—let
alone good husband or father material.
“They have a problem ﬁnding partners,”
suggests Ms Kreyenfeld. 
The distinction might be disappearing,
however. In western Germany, childless-
ness is rising among less educated women,
who are converging with their highly edu-
cated peers. In Finland, a switch has al-
ready occurred: women with only a basic
education are the most likely to remain
childless. It may be that, as two-earner
households become more common, men
have taken to judging women as women
have long judged men. Those who fail to
land dependable jobs might not be given a
good opportunity to have children. 
Nobody knows whether childlessness
will rise further. It has been going up in
most European countries, but not all: the
rate has fallen in Switzerland, for example.
One possibility is that childlessness will
veer up and down, mirroring the eco-
nomic cycle. As the average age of mar-
riage rises and couples push childbearing
into their mid- or even late 30s, they be-
come increasingly vulnerable to shocks. A
bad recession or a mortgage-lending
squeeze will encourage couples to pause—
and, because many now give themselves
only a narrow window before their fertil-
ity drops, some will be knocked out of
childbearing altogether. 
That seems to be happening in Ameri-
ca, points out Tomas Sobotka, of the Vien-
na Institute of Demography. The propor-
tion of 45-year-old American women
without children has fallen steadily since
the turn of the century. Following the ﬁ-
nancial crisis of 2007, though, childless-
ness among 30- and 35-year-old women
shot up (see chart 3). No matter what their
intentions, many of these women are like-
ly to remain childless.
That will not be such a terrible fate.
Childlessness is often undesired, but in
rich Western countries it is hardly calami-
tous. As the peculiarly procreative genera-
tion born around the middle of the 20th
century passes away, it will come to seem
ever more normal. 7

Get ready for another baby bust

United States, childless women at selected 
ages, by year of bir th, %

3

Age: 30

35

45

40

1930

40

50

60

70

80 84

Source: Human Fer tility Database

40

30

20

10

0

48

Business

Online travel

The Priceline party

S A N F R A N C I S C O

Ask an entrepreneur in San Francisco
about Priceline, and you are likely to get a
blank stare. Insiders know better. “There’s
nothing you can point to and say, ‘That’s
something no one else could have done’,”
says Adam Goldstein of Hipmunk, anoth-
er online-travel ﬁrm. “It’s just that Priceline
did everything better in every way.”
The most important reason for Price-
line’s success is shrewd dealmaking. In
2005 it paid around $135m to buy Book-
ing.com, a Dutch website that aggregates
hotel inventory, and merged it with anoth-
er acquisition, a British travel site called Ac-
tive Hotels. Today Booking.com has the
world’s largest supply of hotel accommo-
dation and accounts for the lion’s share of
Priceline’s revenue and market value.
Booking.com was one of the best deals “in

Left for dead after the dotcom boom, a low-proﬁle internet company has staged an
impressive comeback
NOT since the dotcom boom at the turn
of the century have technology shares
been on such a tear. On July 19th the S&P
500 
index of
information-technology
stocks hit a record high, closing above its
previous peak in March 2000 (see Button-
wood). As titans like Google, Facebook and
Amazon hog the limelight, other ﬁrms can
go unnoticed. One that deserves more at-
tention is Priceline, the world’s largest
onlinetravel company. 
Those old enough to remember the dot-
com boom may still associate Priceline,
which was founded in 1997, with its “name
your own price” feature, which let con-
sumers bid for hotel rooms and ﬂights. To-
day it is a Goliath. Its stable of online sites
for booking hotels, cars, ﬂights and restau-
rants spans the world and includes Book-
ing.com, Kayak, Agoda and OpenTable.
Over the past decade Priceline’s pre-tax
earnings have grown at a compound an-
nual rate of 42%, faster than Apple, Ama-
zon, Netﬂix and Alphabet (see chart). It
also boasts a 96% gross margin. Its share
price has risen by more than 50% over the
past 12 months, about four times faster
than the broader stockmarket. On July 26th
the ﬁrm’s market value rose above $100bn. 
Perhaps because Priceline is based in
Connecticut, not Silicon Valley, it is often
overlooked by geeks and technology in-
vestors, who revere Airbnb, a platform for
booking overnight stays in other people’s
homes which is valued at around $30bn.

*Earnings before interest, taxes,
depreciation and amor tisation

EBITDA*, 2006-16, average annual % increase

Source: Thomson
Reuters

Top line

Pr iceline

0

10

20

30

40

50

Netf lix

Expedia

Apple

Amazon

Alphabet

The Economist July 29th 2017

Also in this section
49 The gender pay gap
50 A rough week for German carmakers 
50 How China’s consumers pay for music
51 Fashion and artiﬁcial intelligence
52 Schumpeter: Afr ican conundrum

For daily coverage of business, visit
Economist.com/business-ﬁnance 

the history of the internet”, says Mark Ma-
haney of RBC Capital, an investment bank. 
Priceline’s focus on accommodation
helps explain why it is more proﬁtable and
more highly valued than Expedia, a rival
online-travel company that operates sites
such as Orbitz, Travelocity, Trivago and Ho-
tels.com. Expedia does more business
booking ﬂights, but these are not as lucra-
tive. Online-travel ﬁrms take a meaty com-
mission of 15-18% of a hotel room’s price,
compared with a slim 3-4% for airfares, ac-
cording to Brian Nowak of Morgan Stanley,
another investment bank.
Unlike Google and Amazon, Priceline
does not aim to be on the cutting edge of
technology, but it does make clever use of
it. Booking.com excels at bidding for on-
line-search keywords. It is rumoured to be
the world’s top spender on Google: last
year it spent $3.5bn on “performance mar-
keting”, which is mostly related to search
advertising. Booking.com is also constant-
ly trying new features: it runs around 1,000
tests a day to see what makes users more
likely to click “book”. Some of these experi-
ments, such as free cancellations and rank-
ing hotels by the strength of their Wi-Fi,
have become permanent features.
Steady management has helped the
company, too. Glenn Fogel became Price-
line’s boss in January, after the previous
boss, Darren Huston, resigned for having
an aﬀair with an employee. But Mr Fogel, a
former investment banker and trader, has
worked at Priceline for 16 years and is cred-
ited with initiating the Booking.com deal.
Asked about his ﬁrm’s success, he attri-
butes some of it to letting acquired ﬁrms go
about their business. Kayak, an aggregator
of travel listings that Priceline purchased
for $1.8bn in 2012, for instance, still retains
separate headquarters in Connecticut, six
miles away from Priceline.
And then there are the lessons of the 

1

2

The Economist July 29th 2017 

ﬁrm’s own history. One is not to try too
many things at once. During the dotcom
boom the ﬁrm took the “name your own
price” concept to extremes, allowing peo-
ple to bid on petrol, groceries and even
mortgages. The ensuing bust was bleak:
Priceline’s market value dropped by more
than 99%, to $190m (the share price is up by
30,000% since that trough). That experi-
ence taught management to prize disci-
pline and proﬁtability. The corporate ethos
today is one of a “workhorse, not show-
pony”, says one person close to the ﬁrm.
If analysts have their numbers right, the
future looks bright for Priceline. Last year
travel accounted for an estimated 10% of
global GDP, or $7.6trn. But only around a
third of that is booked online. This share is
expected to rise by a couple of percentage
points a year over time, about the same
pace as e-commerce more broadly. And as
people become wealthier, they tend to tra-
vel more; many in emerging markets are
venturing abroad for the ﬁrst time.
New markets beckon, too. The concept
of “alternative accommodation”—rentals
of apartments, villas and homes—was
popularised by such ﬁrms as Airbnb,
HomeAway and VRBO (the last two are
both now owned by Expedia). But Price-
line is bulking up in this area: last year it of-
fered 568,000 “alternative accommoda-
tion” listings on Booking.com, nearly 50%
more than a year earlier. Airbnb lists 3m,
but many of those are individual rooms for
rent in a larger home, whereas Priceline
mostly oﬀers entire properties, many of
them professionally managed.
Mr Fogel argues that Priceline’s ap-
proach of oﬀering both hotels and other
accommodation makes sense, because
people like having a variety of choices
available in one place. But Priceline will in-
creasingly compete with Airbnb, which is
expected to go public next year and is hun-
gry for growth. Airbnb is said to have plans
to add more listings of boutique hotels and
bed-and-breakfasts to its own service and
has suggested it could oﬀer ﬂights, al-
though it has not oﬀered any details.
Priceline and Airbnb will also compete
over more of consumers’ budgets when
they travel. Earlier this year Airbnb started
selling local “experiences” with guides.
Booking.com is experimenting with selling
tours and other on-the-ground activities in
several cities. The idea is to oﬀer a “holistic
system” for travel, says Mr Fogel, so people
can use the Booking.com app to check into
hotels without queuing, enter their room
by swiping their phone as they do to board
an airline, and make dinner reservations
through OpenTable. Such features are
meant not only to increase the company’s
share of consumer spending, but also to
ensure that customers continue to book on
Priceline’s sites rather than directly with
hotels and restaurants.
But becoming a one-stop-shop for all

Business 49

travel needs won’t be easy. Priceline’s least
successful acquisition was OpenTable, for
which it spent $2.6bn in 2014. Last year Pri-
celine wrote down around a third of its val-
ue, acknowledging that the restaurant-
booking service was not expanding as
quickly as had been expected. This sug-
gests that consumers may be comfortable
using all-purpose sites to book hotels and
ﬂights, but still want to use real-life con-
cierges for local recommendations.
Airbnb is not the only rival Priceline has
to worry about. Technology ﬁrms will
launch more pointed attacks. Google al-
ready oﬀers consumers the ability to re-
search ﬂights and routes, directly taking on
Priceline’s Kayak. The search giant can use

its vast trove of data on consumers to push
more deeply into the travel business.
The most dangerous rival, however,
may well come from somewhere else en-
tirely. “We’re all waiting for the moment
when a big Chinese company comes in
and tries to take market share,” says Erik
Blachford, a former boss of Expedia. Ctrip,
a giant based in Shanghai and worth an es-
timated $30bn, is the obvious candidate.
But if it indeed makes a move, Priceline
will not necessarily suﬀer. Not only is its
Chinese business growing nicely, but it has
also invested nearly $2bn in Ctrip’s debt
and equity. Small wonder that some an-
alysts consider Priceline the best-run inter-
net company after Amazon. 7

Equal pay

Stop gap 

Pay gap between women and men, by job level

2016, % of men’s wages*

Wage war

Spain
Germany

France
Br itain

Sweden

5

+

0

–

5

10

15

20

Highest (16)
*For jobs in same function
and organisation

Cler ical

Professional

Management

Exec.

(1) Lowest

Job level

Source: Korn Ferr y

Are women paid less than men for the same work?
IT HAS been a turbulent few days for the
BBC, Britain’s public broadcaster. On
July 19th it published the names of those
to whom it pays £150,000 ($195,000) or
more a year. The ensuing furore was less
over the level of pay, but the diﬀerences
between men and women. Some female
presenters discovered that they earned
much less than their male peers. Of the
96 people listed, two-thirds are men;
across the BBC, just over half are. 
In a petition, female presenters said
this was evidence that women at the BBC
are paid less than men “for the same
work”. Although this may be true for
people on the BBC’s list, it is much less
clear for the rest of its 9,000 female em-
ployees: a gender pay gap at the top of an
organisation does not necessarily mean
that similar gaps exist at lower levels. 
In Britain, as in other European coun-
tries, the average gap in pay between
men and women in exactly the same
jobs is tiny or non-existent, according to
data for 8.7m employees worldwide
gathered by Korn Ferry, a consultancy.
The diﬀerence is also narrow in each of
the 16 job levels in the database—except,
crucially, in the highest one, in which
men in some countries are indeed paid a
lot more than women (see chart). 
This pattern partly reﬂects the well-
known problems that women have in
advancing to senior positions, whether
because of old boys’ networks or familial
divisions of labour. But it is also reﬂective
of how job markets work. For rank-and-
ﬁle jobs, requirements and pay scales are
largely standardised; both vacancies and
candidates are plentiful. The hiring of
chief executives, television stars or top
footballers, however, is a diﬀerent matter.
These are in limited supply; paying up to

outbid competitors is not unusual. 
Lack of clear-cut rules and secrecy
about pay for top jobs mean that candi-
dates have lots of leeway to negotiate,
says Benjamin Frost of Korn Ferry. Re-
search shows that women do worse than
men in negotiating salaries. Bias is partly
to blame: surveys suggest that when
women put their hands up for a promo-
tion, they are more likely to be viewed as
pushy, whereas men are viewed as ambi-
tious. In 2014 hacked e-mails revealed
that Jennifer Lawrence, an Oscar-win-
ning actress, was paid less than her male
co-stars in “American Hustle”. She later
said that she had not bargained harder
because of expectations to act nicely. 
A new law in Britain requires all big-
gish employers to publish, by April 2018,
data on the pay gap between their male
and female employees. The reactions to
the BBC’s list suggest they would be wise
to break these data down for comparable
jobs. That will show more precisely
where the problem lies. 

50 Business

German carmakers 

Exhausted

P a r i s

a diﬀerent set of problems, especially after
new allegations of underhand practices. A
report on July 21st in Der Spiegel, a maga-
zine, said that Germany’s big carmakers—
Daimler, BMW and VW—had indulged in
anti-competitive behaviour
since 
the
1990s. The most damning claim has echoes
of “dieselgate”: that the ﬁrms agreed in
2008 to install inadequately small tanks of
urea, used to cut nitrogen-oxide emissions
from diesel engines, in order to save cash.
Der Spiegel’s report is based on informa-
tion that VW volunteered to authorities
last July, in reaction to a separate probe into
a steel cartel. European rules on prosecut-
ing cartels give ﬁrms an incentive to blab:
the ﬁrst to admit wrongdoing is typically
exempt from ﬁnes (the second gets a dis-
count). Press reports suggest that Daimler
sent information, too.
The allegations are striking. More than
60 committees stand accused of working
together to ﬁx standards and share techni-
cal information during 1,000 secret meet-
ings. It is unclear if price-ﬁxing took place—
usual practice for a cartel. And rivals are of-
ten yoked together in alliances aimed at
saving money by sharing costs for things
such as engines. But internal e-mails, men-
tioned by Der Spiegel, suggest that manag-
ers and lawyers may have been aware they
might be breaking antitrust rules. The
meetings’ secrecy looks suspicious, as does
the exclusion of foreign rivals.
German and EU antitrust regulators are

Firms are hit by anti-pollution plans and allegations of collusion
STRENGTH and reliability were once the
watchwords of Germany’s carmakers.
Tardiness and scheming seem more apt
terms now. Nearly two years after Volks-
wagen (VW) was caught rigging emissions
tests, the diﬃculties continue to pile up. Eu-
rope is turning against diesel, and even pet-
rol. And German ﬁrms are facing accusa-
tions of collusive behaviour, including
claims of more widespread rigging of emis-
sions tests for diesel engines.
Diesel’s days look numbered. Sales in
Europe are falling fast. Before VW’s misde-
meanours came to light, they accounted
for over half the market in large European
countries. No longer: Morgan Stanley, a
bank, notes that diesel passenger cars took
less than 39% of sales in Germany in June.
Another bank predicts that diesel’s share
will soon drop to 30% across Europe.
Dismay over premature deaths caused
by pollution is one reason. The European
Environment Agency says smog causes
nearly half a million early deaths in Europe
annually. Diesel engines are a big contribu-
tor to local pollution levels because of the
nitrogen oxide they emit. Restrictions
loom in cities across Europe: diesel cars are
likely to be banned in Paris, London, Oslo
and even perhaps in some German cities
such as Stuttgart, home of Daimler. 
P oliticians, who once applauded diesel
engines for emitting less carbon dioxide
than petrol ones, are also getting tough.
Taxes on diesel cars and fuel are rising,
eliminating the cost advantage to motor-
ists. Doubt over the fuel’s future is starting
to hit resale values. Some countries are put-
ting the internal combustion engine itself
on notice. France’s government said this
month that sales of new petrol or diesel
cars will end by 2040. This week Britain
launched a “clean air strategy” with the
same goal. Norway is aiming for 2025.
Carmakers are responding with prom-
ises to make only hybrids or electric cars
within a few years. Volvo says it will do so
by 2019. Daimler and VW have plans to
make large numbers of battery-powered
cars. Yet the German giants still say that
diesel has a future. Their argument that an
all-out war on diesel would deprive them
of much-needed money to invest in new
cleaner technologies has won backing in
Brussels. The EU’s industry commissioner,
Elzbieta Bienkowska, recently warned
against a “rapid collapse of the diesel mar-
ket” as a result of local driving bans.
Rapidly collapsing reputations present

The Economist July 29th 2017

investigating. Some politicians fret for the
industry’s future, amid speculation of
ﬁnes running to billions of euros. That
looks premature. Conﬁrmed facts are few.
And despite the EU ﬁning ﬁve lorrymakers
€2.9bn ($3.4bn) for collusion a year ago,
penalties typically fall far below the maxi-
mum permitted. 
Investors are not panicking: the ﬁrms’
share prices have fallen, but only slightly.
BMW has denied collusion and dodgy
emissions. Daimler and VW have not com-
mented, although they discussed the mat-
ter at swiftly arranged meetings of their su-
pervisory boards on July 26th. But German
carmakers are under more pressure than
ever to dump diesel, accelerate a shift to
battery-powered vehicles and quell con-
cerns about their governance. They will
have to adopt two new watchwords—nim-
bleness and openness. 7

China’s market for music

A pirate’s life no
more

B E I J I N G

Thanks to streaming services, China’s
consumers are now paying for music
HONEST souls intent on paying full
whack for the music they listen to
used to have a hard time in China. In the
era of compact discs, rare was the shop
which did not sell counterfeits. The same
held true when discs turned into down-
loads and online streams of songs: hardly
any service charged money.
Slowly but surely, China is becoming a
market where people pay for music. Over
the past ﬁve years, digital-music revenues
for the recording industry nearly quadru-
pled, to $195m; most of that amount comes
from music streaming (see chart on next
page). That sum may still be a tiny fraction
of the global total of $7.8bn, but streaming
has clearly taken oﬀ in China.
Not everybody is paying: of the 600m
Chinese who listen to music online only
20m have a paid subscription, which costs
between 8 and 12 yuan (between $1 and $2)
a month. The rest tune in for nothing, but
many do so on legal, advertising-sup-
ported services—Chinese equivalents of
the free option on Spotify, the world’s big-
gest streaming service (which is not avail-
able in the country). “Piracy is collapsing,”
says Ed Peto of Outdustry, a ﬁrm in Beijing
oﬀering services to the music industry.
If Chinese consumers have developed
a liking for legal listening, it is for a combi-
nation of reasons. Smartphones, which
have become ubiquitous in recent years,
make it easy to subscribe to streaming ser-
vices. Widespread use of apps such as Ali-
pay and WeChat Pay mean that younger

1

The Economist July 29th 2017 

Legal listening

Global recording industr y revenues from China, $m
of which: streaming
200

Physical

Digital

150

100

50

0

2012

13

14

15

16

Source: IFPI

2 Chinese, in particular, are now used to
making small purchases digitally. And, to
take advantage of the commercial oppor-
tunities in music, China’s big internet plat-
forms have begun to ﬁght piracy.
Not all is rosy, however. The streaming
market is dominated by one player: Ten-
cent, the largest of China’s online giants,
which is best known for its WeChat mes-
saging service. According to some esti-
mates, its market share in music streaming
exceeds 70%. Each of the ﬁrm’s two leading
streaming brands, QQ Music and KuGou,
claims hundreds of millions of users.
One cause of this market concentration
is acquisitions: last year Tencent bought
two big competitors. More importantly,
however, it has paid three international re-
cord labels—Warner Music Group, Sony
Music and Universal Music Group—a big,
but unknown, sum for the exclusive right
to stream their music in China. This means
that Tencent gets to decide which songs ri-
vals are allowed to play.
Tencent says that it needs such exclusiv-
ity to ensure the legitimacy of streaming
services and to reduce piracy further. But
having one ﬁrm with so much power “is
never healthy”, says an executive at a rival
ﬁrm. Xiami, a service owned by Alibaba,
another Chinese internet giant, has lost
lots of ground largely because it has failed
to strike a deal with Tencent. With the mar-
ket growing quickly, the labels may recon-
sider their deals with Tencent when they
come up for renewal. 
Artists also still have gripes. Many ser-
vices built their businesses on pirated mu-
sic before they started licensing it. Even to-
day unlicensed “indie” music is pervasive;
independent labels and artists still get paid
little in royalties, if anything at all, because
of their feeble leverage in negotiations
with the streaming services. In contrast,
stars such as Katy Perry, whose new album
“Witness” surged on its release to number
one on NetEase Cloud Music, a Tencent
competitor, are sure to get their fair share of
revenue. Even so, the overall picture is one
of progress. “We are going in the right direc-
tion,” says Mathew Daniel of NetEase
Cloud Music. 7

Fashion and artiﬁcial intelligence

AI la mode

Data may disrupt a peculiar business
IN THE ﬁlm “The Devil Wears Prada”, the
character of Miranda Priestly, whose role
is based on a feared Vogue editor, scolds
her new assistant for not understanding
fashion. Fashion, she tells her, is whatever
a select group of designers and critics says
it is. What she does not say, however, is that
their judgments are themselves often inﬂu-
enced by another group: fashion forecast-
ers, who predict what will be “in”. Might
these seers of style in turn be undone by ar-
tiﬁcial intelligence (AI)?
Fashion forecasting has always been a
peculiar profession. The business came
into its own in Paris in the 1960s when
agencies began releasing “trend books”,
collections of fabrics and design ideas. Re-
tailers use these books for inspiration as
they put together designs. 
The biggest of these forecasting ﬁrms is
WGSN, with a market share of 50%. It em-
ploys 150 forecasters who scour the world’s
catwalks, bars and clubs to spot the next
big thing. Their ﬁndings are then combined
with other data, from economic indicators
to political sentiment. Petah Marian, a se-
nior editor at WGSN, is conﬁdent that the
methodology works. She says her col-
leagues often exclaim “I forecast that!”
when visiting clothing shops.
Ms Marian’s conﬁdence may seem sur-
prising, given the lack of clear correlations
between fashion and macroeconomic
data. Not much evidence supports the the-
ory of George Taylor, an economist, that
hemlines rise with stocks, and Leonard
Lauder’s suggestion that lipstick sales in-
crease during a downturn. Even the co-
founder of WGSN, Marc Worth, who sold
the ﬁrm to set up a rival service, once stat-
ed: “Nobody can really predict or forecast
trends.” If forecasters can claim accuracy
rates of up to 80%, it is because their predic-
tions are often self-fulﬁlling. Most major re-

Business 51

tailers buy trend books. For designers, they
are a form of insurance: as long as they are
widely used, the risk of being wildly out of
step with the market is modest. 
The business of forecasting is menaced
by data-driven analysis, however. The
clothing industry’s supply chain is becom-
ing more digital and more ﬂexible: Inditex
and H&M, for example, aim to take an idea
and turn it into a ﬁnished product ready for
mass production in two weeks. In re-
sponse, forecasting agencies are making
use of data collated from retailers’ IT sys-
tems and have added short-term predic-
tions to their portfolio of services. In 2013
WGSN launched INstock, a retail-analytics
service, which uses past sales ﬁgures to
predict upcoming bestsellers. EDITED, a
competing service, provides “solid met-
rics” in fashion, claiming to use machine
learning, an AI technique, in order to pred-
ict short-term sales trends.
Such oﬀerings notwithstanding, the
marriage of AI and fashion is still in its in-
fancy. A study in 2014 found that the best
predictive models get it wrong nearly half
the time. But forecasters are likely to face
rising competition as technology ﬁrms en-
ter the market. Google, an online giant,
now has a “Trendspotting” division. It re-
leases a regular “Fashion Trends Report”
based on the ﬁrm’s vast trove of search
data. So far the results are basic: in 2016
slim “mom jeans” were on the rise while
baggier “boyfriend jeans” were on the way
out. But Olivier Zimmer, the project’s data
scientist, says that the goal is to produce
more sophisticated combinations of
search and other data.

The dull edge of intelligence
Whether AI will ever truly replace the
woolly methods of fashion forecasting re-
mains to be seen. Some worry that using
AI may dull design. The business has al-
ready become “pedantic” and a matter of
percentages, says Michael Bennett, a for-
mer forecaster. But Julie King, a fashion ex-
pert at the University of Northampton, ex-
pects the ingenuity of exciting couturiers to
prevail over the homogeneity of data-dri-
ven algorithms. If so, the Miranda Priestlys
of the world won’t stop dictating what’s
hot and what’s not. 7

World of wardrobe

52 Business

The Economist July 29th 2017

Schumpeter

Consumption conundrum

By focusing on shoppers investors in Africa are missing a trick

For much of the past two decades, a bet on the African con-
sumer seemed safe enough. As the turmoil caused by the end of
the cold war faded, the continent entered into a period of vibrant
economic growth. With the median African under the age of 20
in almost all countries south of the Sahara, the potential seemed
limitless. Beer, mobile phones, washing powder, processed food:
all of these products would sell in huge quantities to a fast-grow-
ing, youthful population. GDP was soaring, with growth of
around 5% across the region from 2003 onwards and faster in
many countries.
Yet this blessed era is over. Nigeria, which was proclaimed the
continent’s largest economy in 2014, has probably lost its title
again, to South Africa, after ﬁve consecutive quarters of negative
growth. South Africa’s economy is also in recession, not least
thanks to worries about corruption under President Jacob Zuma.
According to the World Bank, the continent’s economy grew by
just 1.5% last year, the slowest rate in two decades. This year
growth will tick up slightly, but hardly by enough to keep pace
with the expected increase in population.
The cause is the collapse of the commodities boom. Take trade
with America as an example. In 2007 the world’s biggest econ-
omy imported around $90bn-worth of goods from Africa; 90% of
that amount was spent on oil. By last year the ﬁgure had fallen to
just $26.5bn, in large part because of the rise of America’s shale in-
dustry. China, which drove much of the boom, has cut its pur-
chases too: in 2015 it imported less from Africa than it did in 2010.
That means less money for Africans to spend. In many countries
the fastest-growing source of foreign exchange is their diaspora.
Perhaps a little more than 1m Nigerians living abroad (nobody is
sure) remit nearly $20bn per year. That is 40 times what Nigeria’s
biggest non-oil export, cocoa beans, brings in.

Sand in the gears
At the annual Africa conference of the World Economic Forum in
Durban in May, the prevailing view among investors was that
they just had to wait. “If you’re really playing in Africa, this is a
glitch,” said one smartly suited partner from a private-equity
ﬁrm. Having pinned their hopes on a rising African middle class,
the vice-presidents of big Western ﬁrms assume that this is a blip.
The sheer scale of urbanisation and population growth, their
thinking runs, will be enough to make the numbers work.
With little prospect of a new commodities boom, the wait
could be a long one. But executives willing to get their feet dirty
and take a few more risks will ﬁnd there is money to be made in
other ways. Manufacturing in Africa is tough, thanks to costly
power and poor logistics. Yet it is not impossible. In Ivory Coast,
Olam, a Singaporean agribusiness ﬁrm, has opened a $75m fac-
tory, which will turn the world’s biggest cocoa producer into its
biggest processor, too. Across the continent, Chinese entrepre-
neurs are ﬁnding proﬁtable things to export—from donkey meat
in Kenya to canned ﬁsh in Senegal. 
Whether the multinational executives who jet into interna-
tional conferences, imbibing good wine and bad speeches, are
well-placed to spot such opportunities is questionable. Many
seem unwilling to move much beyond their comfort zones, pre-
ferring to think of sub-Saharan Africa as little more than a store-
front. According to one survey by Infomineo, a research com-
pany, after Johannesburg, the two biggest cities for the African
headquarters of big multinational ﬁrms are Paris and London.
Much good can they do from there. 7

NAIROBI, Kenya’s capital, is also known as the “Green City in
the Sun”. It might as well be called the city of malls: it has
never had such a wide choice. The newest outlet, named Two Riv-
ers, sits on a road near the American embassy and contains no
less than three diﬀerent malls in the space of a square mile or so.
Here, you can scoﬀ a Burger King before wandering around a
huge new Carrefour supermarket to stock up on French cheese,
British-made breakfast cereals and Turkish-made clothes. The
owners proudly proclaim that it is sub-Saharan Africa’s biggest
mall. It is certainly among the glitziest.
And yet walking into Two Rivers is an odd experience. The
scale is huge, but the place is eerily quiet. More than a few shop-
fronts are empty, with hoardings instead of windows. Those that
are occupied have a mere trickle of customers, and the goods they
sell—furniture, clothes, electronics—are ambitiously priced. Two
Rivers feels a bit like a Potemkin village, projecting an illusion of
aﬄuence. The reality is that most Nairobians do not go anywhere
near big supermarkets, where many of the products on sale cost
more than they earn in a day. Nor will they buy the new clothes in
the fancy boutiques. Instead, they purchase processed food in
tiny quantities at kiosks, and buy clothes and fresh produce at
open-air markets under plastic awnings.
Two Rivers is a project of Centum, a Kenyan ﬁrm; a large
chunk of the funding comes from Avic International, a ﬁrm based
in Hong Kong, as well as from Old Mutual, a South African insur-
er. It is one of dozens of such projects across Africa, whose aim is
to capitalise on the rise of the African consumer. Malls are not the
only things that can weirdly feel out of place. In Niamey, the capi-
tal of Niger, a landlocked swathe of desert that is one of the poor-
est countries in the world, huge billboards advertise ﬁrst-class air-
line tickets. In Kinshasa, the capital of the Democratic Republic of
Congo, they promote big-screen televisions.
Some of these ventures will make money. But as rich-world
ﬁrms pull out the stops to sell their wares to Africans, they risk be-
ing blinded to two facts. Only a tiny minority of locals has the
means to pay for them. According to the African Development
Bank, just 13% of Africans earn more than $4 a day. And in the rush
to cater to a continent of emergent consumers, foreign investors
are missing real opportunities to use Africa as a production base.

Economics br ief Six big ideas

The Economist July 29th 2017 53

working as a lecturer in Dundee, in 1932,
having spent the prior academic year in
America, visiting factories and businesses.
“The nature of the ﬁrm”, his paper, did not
appear for another ﬁve years, in part be-
cause he was reluctant to rush into print.
Though widely cited today, it went largely
unread at ﬁrst. But a second paper, “The
problem of social cost”, published in 1960,
by which time he had moved to America,
brought him to prominence. It argued that
private bargaining could resolve social pro-
blems, such as pollution, as long as proper-
ty rights are well deﬁned and transaction
costs are low (they rarely are). He had been
asked to expound his new theory earlier
that year to a sceptical audience of Univer-
sity of Chicago economists. By the end of
the evening, he had won everyone around.
Coase was invited to join the university’s
faculty in 1964; and there he remained until
his death in 2013 at the age of 102. 
In 1991 Coase was awarded the Nobel
prize for economics, largely on the strength
of these two papers. But as late as 1972, he
lamented that “The nature of the ﬁrm” had
been “much cited and little used”. In a
strange way, Coase himself was partly to
blame. The idea of transaction costs was
such a good catch-all explanation for tricky
subjects that it was used to close down fur-
ther inquiry. In fact, Coase’s paper raised as
many diﬃcult questions as it answered. If
ﬁrms exist to reduce transaction costs, why
have market transactions at all? Why not
further extend the ﬁrm’s boundaries? In
short, what decides how the economy as a
whole is organised?
Almost as soon as Coase had wished
for it, a body of more rigorous research on
such questions began to ﬂourish. Central
to it was the idea that it is diﬃcult to specify
all that is required of a business relation-
ship, so some contracts are necessarily “in-
complete”. Important ﬁgures in this ﬁeld
include Oliver Williamson, winner of the
Nobel prize in economics in 2009, and Oli-
ver Hart and Bengt Holmstrom, who
shared the prize in 2016. These and other
Coase apostles drew on the work of legal
theorists in distinguishing between spot
transactions and business relations that re-
quire longer-term or ﬂexible contracts.
Spot markets cover most transactions.
Once money is exchanged for goods, the
deal is completed. The transaction is sim-
ple: one party wants, another supplies.
There is little scope for dispute, so a written
contract can be dispensed with. If one
party is unhappy, he will take his business
elsewhere next time. Spot markets are thus
largely self-policing. They are well suited
to simple, low-value transactions, such as
buying a newspaper or taking a taxi. 
Things become trickier when the par-
ties are locked into a deal that is costly to
get out of. Take a property lease, for in-
stance. A business that is evicted from its

1

The theor y of the ﬁrm

Coase call

In this ser ies

1 Coase and the ﬁrm

2 Becker and human capital

3 Say's law
4 Pigouvian taxes
5 The natural rate of unemployment

If markets are so good at directing resources, why do ﬁrms exist? The ﬁrst in our
summer series on big economic ideas 
ONE morning, an economist went to
buy a shirt. The one he chose was a
marvel of global production. It was made
in Malaysia using German machines. The
cloth was woven from Indian cotton
grown from seeds developed in America.
The collar lining came from Brazil; the arti-
ﬁcial ﬁbre from Portugal. Millions of shirts
of every size and colour are sold every day,
writes Paul Seabright, the shirt-buying
economist, in his 2004 book, “The Com-
pany of Strangers”. No authority is in
charge. The ﬁrms that make up the many
links in the chain that supplied his shirt
had merely obeyed market prices. 
Throwing light on the magic of market
co-ordination was a mainstay of the “clas-
sical” economics of the late-18th and 19th
centuries. Then, in 1937, a paper published
by Ronald Coase, a British economist,
pointed out a glaring omission. The stan-
dard model of economics did not ﬁt with
what goes on within companies. When an
employee switches from one division to
another, for instance, he does not do so in
response to higher wages, but because he
is ordered to. The question posed by Coase
was profound, if awkward for economics:
why are some activities directed by market

forces and others by ﬁrms? 
His answer was that ﬁrms are a re-
sponse to the high cost of using markets. It
is often cheaper to direct tasks by ﬁat than
to negotiate and enforce separate contracts
for every transaction. Such “exchange
costs” are low in markets for standardised
goods, wrote Coase. A well-deﬁned task
can easily be put out to the market, where a
contractor is paid a ﬁxed sum for doing it.
The ﬁrm comes into its own when simple
contracts of this kind will not suﬃce. In-
stead, an employee agrees to follow varied
and changing instructions, up to agreed
limits, for a ﬁxed salary. 
Coase had ﬁrst set out his theory while

6 Overlapping generations

54 Economics br ief

2 premises might not quickly ﬁnd a building
with similar features. Equally, if a tenant
suddenly quit, the landlord might not ﬁnd
a replacement straight away. Each could
threaten the other in a bid for a better rent.
The answer is a long-term contract that
speciﬁes the rent, the tenure and use of the
property. Both parties beneﬁt. 
But for many business arrangements, it
is diﬃcult to set down all that is required of
each party in all circumstances. In such
cases, formal contracts are by necessity “in-
complete” and sustained largely by trust.
An employment contract is of this type. It
has a few formal terms: job title, work
hours, initial pay and so on, but many of
the most important duties and obligations
are not written down. It is thus like a “mini-
society with a vast array of norms beyond
those centred on the exchange and its im-
mediate processes”, wrote Mr Williamson.
Such a contract stays in force mostly be-
cause its breakdown would hurt both par-
ties. And because market forces are soft-
ened in such a contract, it calls for an
alternative form of governance: the ﬁrm. 
One of the ﬁrst papers to elucidate
these ideas was published in 1972 by Ar-
men Alchian and Harold Demsetz. They
deﬁned the ﬁrm as the central contractor in
a team-production process. When output
is the result of a team eﬀort, it is hard to put
the necessary tasks out to the market. That
is because it is tricky to measure the contri-
bution of each member to the ﬁnished
work and to then allocate their rewards ac-
cordingly. So the ﬁrm is needed to act as
both co-ordinator and monitor of a team. 

Chain tale
If a team of workers requires a ﬁrm as mon-
itor, might that also be true for teams of
suppliers? In some cases, ﬁrms are indeed
vertically integrated, meaning that suppli-
ers of inputs and producers of ﬁnal goods
are under the same ownership. But in oth-
er cases, suppliers and their customers are
separate entities. When is one set-up right
and not the other?
A paper published in 1986 by Sanford
Grossman and Mr Hart sharpened the
thinking on this. They distinguished be-
tween two types of rights over a ﬁrm’s as-
sets (its plant, machinery, brands, client
lists and so on): speciﬁc rights, which can
be contracted out, and residual rights,
which come with ownership. Where it be-
comes costly for a company to specify all
that it wants from a supplier, it might make
sense to acquire it in order to claim the re-
sidual rights (and the proﬁts) from owner-
ship. But, as Messrs Grossman and Hart
noted, something is also lost through the
merger. The supplier’s incentive to inno-
vate and to control costs vanishes, because
he no longer owns the residual rights.
To illustrate this kind of relationship,
they used the example of an insurance
ﬁrm that pays a commission to an agent for

selling policies. To encourage the agent to
ﬁnd high-quality clients, which are more
likely to renew a policy, the ﬁrm defers
some portion of the agent’s pay and ties it
to the rate of policy renewals. The agent is
thus induced to work hard to ﬁnd good cli-
ents. But there is a drawback. The insur-
ance ﬁrm now has an incentive of its own
to shirk. While the agent is busting a gut to
ﬁnd the right sort of customers, the ﬁrm
can take advantage by, say, cutting its
spending on advertising its policies, raising
their price or lowering their quality. 
There is no set-up in which the incen-
tives of ﬁrm and agent can be perfectly
aligned. But Messrs Grossman and Hart
identiﬁed a next-best solution: the party
that brings the most to any venture in
terms of “non-contractible” eﬀort should
own the key assets, which in this case is the
client list. So the agent ought to own the list
wherever policy renewals are sensitive to
sales eﬀort, as in the case of car insurance,
for which people tend to shop around
more. The agent would keep the residual
rights and be rewarded for the eﬀort to ﬁnd
the right sort of client. If the insurance ﬁrm
shirks, the agent can simply sell the poli-
cies of a rival ﬁrm to his clients. But in cases
where the ﬁrm brings more to the party
than the sales agent—for example, when
clients are “stickier” and the ﬁrst sale is cru-
cial, as with life insurance—a merger
would make more sense. 
This framework helps to address one of
the questions raised by Coase’s original
paper: when should a ﬁrm “make” and
when should it “buy”? It can be applied to
vertical business ties of all kinds. For in-
stance, franchises have to abide by a few
rules that can be set down in a contract, but
get to keep the residual proﬁts in exchange
for a royalty fee paid to the parent ﬁrm.
That is because the important eﬀorts that
the parent requires of a franchisee are not
easy to put in a contract or to enforce. 
The management of ties between a ﬁrm
and its “stakeholders” (its customers, sup-

The Economist July 29th 2017

pliers, employees and investors) is another
variation on this theme. A ﬁrm often wants
to put restraints on the parties it does busi-
ness with. Luxury-goods ﬁrms or makers
of fancy sound equipment may ban retail-
ers from discounting their goods as a way
to spur them to compete with rivals on the
quality of their shops, service and advice. 

Inside the cubicle
If one of the challenges set by Coase was to
explain where the boundary between
ﬁrms and markets lies, another was for
economic analysis not to cease once it
reached the factory gate or oﬃce lobby. A
key issue is how agreements are struc-
tured. Why, for instance, do employment
contracts have so few formal obligations?
One insight from the literature is that a
tightly speciﬁed contract can have per-
verse outcomes. If teachers are paid ac-
cording to test results, they will “teach to
the test” and pay less regard to other tasks,
such as inspiring pupils to think indepen-
dently. If chief executives are paid to boost
the ﬁrm’s short-term share price, they will
cut investment projects that may beneﬁt
shareholders in the long run. 
Mr Holmstrom and Paul Milgrom es-
tablished that where important tasks are
hard to monitor, and where a balance of
activities is needed, then a contract should
shun strong incentives tied to any one task.
The best approach is to pay a ﬁxed salary
and to leave the balance of tasks unspeci-
ﬁed. A related idea developed by Mr Hart
and John Moore is of a job contract as a
“reference point” rather than as a detailed
map. Another insight is that deferred forms
of pay, such as company pension schemes
and promotions based on seniority, help
cement long-term ties with employees and
reward them for investing in skills speciﬁc
to the relationship. 
Coase noted in 1937 that the degree to
which the mechanism of price is super-
seded by the ﬁrm varies with the circum-
stances. Eighty years on, the boundary be-
tween the two might appear
to be
dissolving altogether. The share of self-em-
ployed contractors in the labour force has
risen. The “gig economy” exempliﬁed by
Uber drivers is mushrooming. 
Yet ﬁrms are unlikely to wither away.
Prior to Uber, most taxi drivers were al-
ready self-employed. Spot-like job con-
tracts are becoming more common, but
ﬂexibility comes at a cost. Workers have lit-
tle incentive to invest in ﬁrm-speciﬁc skills,
so productivity suﬀers. And even if Mr Sea-
bright’s shirt was delivered by a set of mar-
ket-based transactions, the supply chains
for complex goods, such as an iPhone or an
Airbus A380 superjumbo, rely on long-
term contracts that are often “incomplete”.
Coase was the ﬁrst to spot an enduring
truth. Successful economies need both the
benign dictatorship of the ﬁrm and the in-
visible hand of the market. 7

Finance and economics

Bitcoin’s civil war

Breaking the chains

B E I J I N G A N D L O N D O N

they are added to a decentralised digital
ledger, called “blockchain”, that contains
the payment history of all bitcoins in circu-
lation. Mr Nakamoto limited the block size
to one megabyte, meaning that the system
can only handle a maximum of seven tran-
sactions a second. Payment systems like
Visa can process thousands in that time.
With demand growing steadily, the system
started to slow; users had to oﬀer miners
fees of several dollars a pop to get their
transactions processed speedily. 
The answers seem obvious: make the
blocks larger or pack transactions more

The digital currency may avoid a split, but the causes of a bitter conﬂict between
rival camps remain
IN DIFFERENT circumstances the two
people could be good friends. Each is
rather shy and very smart. And each is pas-
sionate about bitcoin, a digital currency.
One invented hashcash, which foreshad-
owed components of the crypto-currency;
the other is the author of the ﬁrst Chinese
translation of the white paper in which Sa-
toshi Nakamoto, the elusive creator of bit-
coin, ﬁrst described its inner workings.
Adam Back is the chief executive of
Blockstream, a British startup, which em-
ploys some of the main developers of the
software that deﬁnes bitcoin’s inner work-
ings. Jihan Wu is the boss of Bitmain, a Chi-
nese ﬁrm, which makes about 80% of the
chips that power “miners”, specialised
computers that keep the bitcoin network
secure, conﬁrm payments and mint new
digital coins. But far from being fellow-trav-
ellers, each represents one of the two main
camps in what has come to be called a “bit-
coin civil war”, fought over how, if at all,
the system should grow. 
The worst seems to have been avoided.
On July 21st a large majority of miners sig-
nalled their support for a compromise, re-
ducing the risk of a split of bitcoin into dif-
ferent currencies and driving its price back
up towards $3,000 (see chart). But a “fork”,
as some call this possible split, may only
have been delayed: the issues underlying
the dispute have not been truly resolved.
At issue is the size of a “block”, the
name given to the batches into which bit-
coin transactions are assembled before

Average conf irmation time, minutes

A M J J A S O N D

J F M A M J J

Bitcoin
Pr ice, $’000

Time is money

3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0

Source: Blockchain.info

2,000

2009 10

11

12

13

14

15

16 17

2016

3,000

1,000

0

2017

The Economist July 29th 2017 55

Also in this section
56 Buttonwood: Tech highs
57 Crops and conﬂict
58 Bank closures in Amer ica
58 Pandemic bonds
59 Free exchange: Too many quiet lives

For daily analysis and debate on economics, visit
Economist.com/economics

densely. Yet bitcoin’s growing pains are less
technical than political. “The big question
is who gets to lead an organisation that is
supposed to be leaderless,” says Jeﬀ Gar-
zik, the boss of Bloq, a bitcoin startup.
Bitcoin is big business: the combined
value of coins in circulation is now $40bn.
The number of transactions a day is ap-
proaching 300,000 on average, generating
a trading volume of $1.5bn. And bitcoin has
become a global platform for hundreds of
startups, oﬀering services from trading the
currency to providing market data and op-
erating bitcoin ATMs.
As bitcoin’s ecosystem has grown, how-
ever, so have the divisions within it. Many
stem from a fundamental diﬀerence in vi-
sion: whether bitcoin should be more like
gold or more like cash. This echoes a dicho-
tomy between two schools of thought on
the nature of money: whether, as “metal-
lists” argue, it is more of a bottom-up aﬀair,
emerging naturally as a medium of ex-
change and a store of value in the same
way as gold; or whether, as “chartalists”
say, money is mostly a top-down creation
by a government to enable it to collect tax-
es and provide citizens with a user-friendly
way to settle their debts.
Unhelpfully, bitcoin is a bit of both. It is
bottom-up: people freely opt into the sys-
tem, to speculate or make payments that
governments cannot block. But it is also
top-down: Mr Nakamoto set not only the
block size but other technical parameters,
including the stipulation that there would
only ever be 21m bitcoins in circulation. 
Mr Back says it all comes down to a
trade-oﬀ: let bitcoin grow too large too
quickly and it will turn into a more central-
ised payment system that governments
can interfere with. That is because, if the
blockchain becomes too big, individual
holders will no longer be able to use their
own computers to check whether a tran-
saction is valid. Consequently, Mr Back 

1

56 Finance and economics

The Economist July 29th 2017

2 wants to keep the blocks relatively small
and change the system in other ways, such
as bundling smaller transactions before
they are conﬁrmed (an approach known
as “lightning”). To alleviate the system’s
congestion, Mr Back and other leading cod-
ers, collectively called “Bitcoin Core”, have
developed a solution to pack blocks more
densely, using a technique known as “seg-
regated witness”, or SegWit.
If Mr Black is the theorist, Mr Wu is the
pragmatist. He sees no trade-oﬀ between
scale and security, at least not in the fore-
seeable future. To him, bitcoin is held back
by a decision on block size that Mr Naka-

moto only made for practical reasons. Not
changing it would “kill the golden goose”.
He has thrown his weight behind those
who want to double the block size as
quickly as possible and increase it even
more later on. 
Behind these diﬀerences in philosophy
lurk divergent economic interests. Bitmain
is not only selling mining hardware, but
minting bitcoin for its own account (Mr Wu
claims he controls about 10% of the sys-
tem’s computing power). It also operates
big “mining pools”, to which smaller oper-
ators can connect. He is also said to have
amassed a sizeable amount of bitcoins. All

these assets provide a strong incentive for
him to keep the system growing but intact.
In the case of Mr Back and his fellow
coders the mix of interests is more com-
plex. Blockstream is not the same as Bitcoin
Core: only a few of the group’s developers
work for the ﬁrm. They are in it partly for
the intellectual challenge and because of
their libertarian ideology. But Blockstream,
as well as the venture capitalists backing it,
would clearly beneﬁt if bitcoin develops in
the way preferred by Mr Back. It wants to
make money from versions of lightning
and other blockchain-scaling software. 
In its early days the internet itself saw

1

Buttonwood

Hope rebooted

Reality bytes

Global technology stocks, Januar y 1st 1996=100

Pr ice index

Earnings

2000

05

10

15 17

600

500

400

300

200

100

0

Source: BlackRock Investment Institute

1996

Tech stocks have regained their dotcom-era highs
CAST your mind back to when Bill
Clinton was president, Tony Blair
and Vladimir Putin were fresh-faced new
leaders and tweeting was strictly for the
birds. That was when technology stocks,
as measured by the S&P 500 tech index,
last traded at their current levels.
The horrendous decline in share
prices that followed the peak in 2000 was
the ﬁrst ﬁnancial calamity of this millen-
nium. The dotcom crash had much less
impact on the broader economy than the
mortgage and banking crisis of 2007-08.
Nevertheless, the tech revival has caused
some twitchiness among investors. Might
history be repeating itself?
In the intervening years the world,
and the tech industry, have changed a lot.
In the late 1990s enthusiasm for tech
shares was so great that the sector’s mar-
ket value rose far faster than its earnings.
The gap is nothing like as great today (see
chart). Back then, leading ﬁrms like Micro-
soft and Oracle were valued at more than
20 times their annual revenues, let alone
earnings. This time around, with the ex-
ception of Facebook, price-to-revenue ra-
tios are much less stretched. 
What boosted tech businesses in the
late 1990s was that everyone was discov-
ering the internet at the same time. Both
companies and consumers were buying
computers and associated items like mo-
dems. That led to rapid revenue growth.
But the sudden enthusiasm for tech was
also its greatest weakness; every college
graduate seemed to have a plan to start a
dotcom company. The market became
overcrowded. Investors struggled to tell
the long-term winners from the losers.
Since then, investors have focused
their enthusiasm on companies that can
exploit “network eﬀects” and become
dominant in their sector—Google in inter-
net search, for example. The latest rally

has been led by a small number of stocks,
sometimes dubbed the FAANGs (Face-
book, Amazon, Apple, Netﬂix and Goo-
gle’s parent, Alphabet) and sometimes
FAAMG (replacing Netﬂix with Microsoft).
In June Goldman Sachs said this latter
group had been responsible for 40% of the
S&P 500 index’s gains in the year to that
point. The tech industry was Wall Street’s
best performer in the ﬁrst half of the year. 
Eddie Perkin of Eaton Vance, a fund-
management company, says that investors
started the year with too much enthusiasm
for the “Trump trade”, the idea of owning
stocks that might beneﬁt from the new
president’s policies. Companies with high
tax bills, and those exposed to infrastruc-
ture spending, were two examples. As
hopes for action from the new administra-
tion faded, enthusiasm for tech stocks
surged; this industry can generate proﬁts
growth regardless of the economic out-
look. Tech companies in the S&P 500 are
likely to record double-digit year-on-year
proﬁts growth in the second quarter. 
Earnings expansion on that
scale
means that few investors can aﬀord to ig-
nore tech stocks. Since 2009 the industry

has been the most favoured by global
fund managers for 80% of the time, ac-
cording to a regular survey by Bank of
America Merrill Lynch. But the latest sur-
vey reﬂected fears that the enthusiasm
may have gone too far: 38% of managers
thought that betting on tech stocks was
the “most crowded trade”; a net 9% had
cut their exposure in the previous month. 
The risks facing the tech industry now
are rather diﬀerent from those that sur-
faced in 2000. Then, it became clear that
many companies would burn through
their cash long before they made a proﬁt.
This time, the industry is more mature;
Apple’s fastest growth is surely behind it,
for example. Whereas the sector was gen-
erally held in high regard in 2000, it is
now the object of more suspicion, wheth-
er it is public concern about individuals’
privacy, Donald Trump’s anti-Amazon
tweets or EU ﬁnes against American tech
giants. Regulation may yet prove a barrier
to tech’s long-term growth.
So, history isn’t repeating itself exactly.
There is nothing like the same stockmark-
et euphoria as there was at the turn of the
century. Few people are trying to day-
trade their way to riches or setting up a
dotcom franchise to sell dog food. And
tech stocks are not as much of an outlier
as they were (along with media and tele-
coms ﬁrms) in 2000, when many inves-
tors abandoned “old economy” compa-
nies in retailing and heavy industry. 
But there is still plenty that can go
wrong. The overall market is on a cyclical-
ly adjusted price-earnings ratio of 30—a
level surpassed only in 1929 and the late
1990s. If the Federal Reserve tightens poli-
cy too aggressively, or the American econ-
omy slips into recession (or both), tech in-
vestors will get that sinking feeling again. 

Economist.com/blogs/buttonwood

The Economist July 29th 2017 

2 similar ﬁghts. It developed institutions to
overcome them, such as the Internet Engi-
neering Task Force. Bitcoin has an IETF-like
“improvement process” of its own, but
agreeing on changes to a protocol that di-
rectly manages billions of dollars has
proved hard. The growing power of the
miners had added to the diﬃculty in reach-
ing a consensus. Their main source of rev-
enue is the “block reward”: every ten min-
utes miners engage in a race over who gets
to update the blockchain; the winner is
awarded 12.5 bitcoin, about $30,000 at the
current exchange rate.
Mr Nakamoto had planned for mining
to be a very fragmented activity, done by
individual bitcoin holders. But because
bigger mining operations have an advan-
tage over smaller ones, the industry has
quickly become highly concentrated. More
than 60% of mining power is thought to be
generated in China, where electricity is
cheap and data centres easy to build. This
gives their operators a veto: only if enough
of them implement changes do they be-
come the rule.
The dispute over how to scale bitcoin is
now best described as a conﬂict between
Chinese miners and Western developers.
Whereas Mr Wu and Mr Back are surpris-
ingly polite when talking about each other,
the foot-soldiers in this ﬁght haven’t pulled
punches: mining farms have been attacked
and the bitcoin system spammed to wors-
en congestion. Several attempts have been
made to force the issue to a vote, using
blocks as ballots.
This wrangling could have gone on for
ages. But bitcoin is no longer the only kid
on the crypto block; it is facing competi-
tion, in particular from Ethereum, a new
type of blockchain. It was launched only a
couple of years ago, and has grown fast. It
has also given rise to a wave of “initial coin
oﬀerings” (ICOs), a novel way of crowd-
funding. “While bitcoin is stuck in a stale-
mate, the competition has moved on,” says
Emin Gun Sirer of Cornell University.
Worries about competition prompted
the July 21st decision. A group of bitcoin ac-
tivists earlier this year launched what was,
in eﬀect, an attempt to ﬁre miners if they
don’t implement SegWit. In response, Mr
Wu in June released a “contingency plan”
that amounts to getting rid of the develop-
ers: should the other side force his hand, he
would extend a blockchain of his own and
move to a block size of two megabytes—
which would have led to a bitcoin split. 
To avert that outcome, a group of bit-
coin businesses came up with a compro-
mise called “SegWit2x”, which provided
for the implementation ﬁrst, in mid-Au-
gust, of SegWit and then, three months lat-
er, a block size of two megabytes. It is this
compromise that won the oﬃcial support
of almost all miners.
A split has been averted—for now.
Whereas SegWit seems a given, it is not

clear whether the second step will be tak-
en. Developers have already said that the
timeframe is too ambitious—a deadline of
12-18 months is more realistic. If things drag
on, a schism could become inevitable. And
if that happens, expect an epic battle over
who can lay claim to the bitcoin brand.
Whatever the outcome, one lesson of
this conﬂict is clear. Decentralised crypto-
currencies and other blockchain-based
systems need robust governance mecha-
nisms if they want to be able to evolve and
stay relevant. Otherwise they risk ossiﬁca-
tion. Since 
crypto-currencies
“were
created to replace institutional decision-
making,” argues Andreas Antonopoulos,
the author of “Mastering Bitcoin”, they will
have to ﬁnd other ways to evolve. 
Tezos, another blockchain, will soon
test one such mechanism: it will not only
have regular votes on competing propos-
als for how to change the system, but a
more scientiﬁc approach to evaluating
them and a way to compensate the devel-
opers for coming up with ideas. If their pro-
posals are accepted, they will get paid in
Tezos coins. The approach appears to have
resonated within the crypto world: when
Tezos closed its ICO earlier this month, it
had raised a record $232m. 
Even if bitcoin does not split, therefore,
the ﬁght over block sizes marks a fork in the
road for crypto-currencies. The era of bit-
coin’s dominance is ending; the future be-
longs to many competing digital monies.
And the winners among them will be
those currencies that can adapt their rules
without having strong rulers. 7

Crops and conﬂict

A bitter harvest

Research ﬁnds a strong historical link
between poor crop yields and violence
LAST year over 102,000 people died in
nearly 50 armed conﬂicts across the
world, according to the Peace Research In-
stitute Oslo, a think-tank. Much of this vio-
lence is caused by tensions between ethnic
groups—two-thirds of civil wars have been
fought along ethnic lines since 1946. Yet his-
torians diﬀer over whether cultural diﬀer-
ences or economic pressures best explain
how tensions explode into violence.
A new study* by Robert Warren Ander-
son, Noel Johnson and Mark Koyama sug-
gests that, historically, economic shocks
were more strongly associated with out-
breaks of violence directed against Jews
than scholars had previously thought. The
authors collected data for 1,366 anti-Semit-
ic events involving forced emigration or
murderous pogroms in 936 European cities

Finance and economics 57

The ver y dark ages

between 1100 and 1800. This was then
compared with historical temperature
data from a variety of sources, including
tree rings, Arctic ice cores and contempo-
rary descriptions of the weather.
Cold spells hit medieval agriculture
hard: a one-degree Celsius fall in tempera-
tures reduced the growing season by up to
four weeks. Lower yields caused wide-
spread economic pain: up to 57% of people
relied on farming for work in medieval
England, for instance. The authors ﬁnd that
a fall in average temperatures of only a
third of a degree increased the probability
of a pogrom or expulsion by 50% over the
next ﬁve years. They argue that violence
against Jews was not simply caused by reli-
giously-motivated anti-Semitism: “The
Jews were convenient scapegoats for so-
cial and economic ills.”
The authors ﬁnd that economic shocks
had greater eﬀects where soils were less
suited to farming or where governments
were weaker, and so less able to stop vio-
lence. A fall in anti-Semitic attacks in the
17th and 18th centuries was due to the
emergence of strong nation-states able to
smooth out economic bumps and protect
minorities during periods of strain, the pa-
per concludes.
Echoes of these patterns are discernible
today. Many economists have linked the
weather—particularly droughts and heat-
waves in agricultural economies—to out-
breaks of intercommunal violence in de-
veloping
countries. Another
paper
published last year, by Carl-Friedrich
Schleussner and his colleagues, found that
between 1980 and 2010 23% of civil wars
coincided with climate-related disasters in
countries with deep ethnic divides. Global
warming may worsen this problem fur-
ther. The lesson of history is that better po-
litical institutions can help soothe ten-
sions. But these institutions take decades
to develop. A quicker solution—insurance
that pays out in years of bad weather—may
not just be a boon for farmers, but for the
world’s ethnic minorities, too. 7

...............................................................

* Sources can be found online at economist.com

58 Finance and economics

Retail banking

Withdrawal
symptoms

American banks are closing branches
WINDSOR, a community of 6,200 peo-
ple two hours outside Albany in
New York state, oﬀers many of the ameni-
ties commonly found in a small town, in-
cluding a bakery, a car-repair outﬁt and sev-
eral restaurants. There is just one thing
missing: a bank. The town’s only ﬁnancial
institution, First Niagara Bank, shut its
doors in October. 
Towns like Windsor are becoming ever
more common in America. Since the ﬁnan-
cial crisis, banks have closed over 10,000
branches, an average of three a day. In the
ﬁrst half of 2017 alone, a net 869 brick-and-
mortar entities shut their doors, according
to S&P Global Market Intelligence, a re-
search ﬁrm. Some fret that branch closures
risk turning poorer neighbourhoods into
“banking deserts”, cut oﬀ from current ac-
counts, loans and other basic services. 
Not long ago, the notion that Ameri-
cans might lack suﬃcient access to bank
tellers would have seemed absurd. In the
years leading up to the crisis, bricks-and-
mortar branches grew by about 200 each
month. By 2009, according to the World
Bank, America had 35 branches for every
100,000 adults, twice as many as Ger-
many. Since then, however, ultra-low inter-
est rates and thickets of new regulations
have squeezed bank proﬁts. They have re-
sponded by trimming branches from a
peak of about 100,000 to roughly 90,000. 
Bank bosses maintain that they are “op-
timising” their branch networks to ﬁt
changing customer habits. But the cuts
have not been made evenly. Data from the
Federal Deposit
Insurance Corporation
(FDIC) show that the top ﬁfth of all postal
codes by household income lost around
3% of their branches between 2009 and
2016. During this period, the bottom ﬁfth
saw their branch numbers decline by 10%. 
Community organisations worry that
if branches continue to close in poor areas,
many neighbourhoods could become reli-
ant on payday lenders and cheque-cashing
stores. In June the Federal Reserve Bank of
St Louis estimated that there are now more
than 1,100 banking deserts—deﬁned as cen-
sus areas at least ten miles from a bank—in
America. That ﬁgure could easily double if
small community banks continue to close.
In May the National Community Reinvest-
ment Coalition, a non-proﬁt group, pub-
lished a report showing that the number of
banking deserts in rural areas has in-
creased by 86 since the crisis. 
The situation may be less dire than it

seems. An analysis of FDIC data by The
Economist shows that banking deserts, us-
ing the Fed’s deﬁnition, are home to just
1.7% of the population. For most of the
country, banks are still within easy reach—
typically just two miles away. Nine out of
ten Americans live within ﬁve miles of a
bank; half live within one mile. 
Even if banks remain accessible to
most, branch closures can take a heavy toll.
“The loss of a bank has a signiﬁcant impact
on communities,” says James Chessen of
the American Bankers Association. The
cost is greatest for small businesses, which
often lack audited ﬁnancial statements
and other information that can be ana-
lysed remotely. “At the local community
level, so much of that business is driven by

The Economist July 29th 2017

relationships,” says Chris Vanderpool of
S&P Global Market Intelligence. “The far-
ther out you are, the harder it is to manage
those relationships.” A study in 2014 by
Hoai-Luu Nguyen, now at the University
of California, Berkeley, estimates that
when branches close, new small-business
lending falls by 13% in the surrounding
area. In 
low-income neighbourhoods,
such lending contracts by nearly 40%.
Even if ﬁnancial regulation loosens and
interest rates rise, branches are likely to
thin further. JLL, a property ﬁrm, reckons
that by 2027 the number of bricks-and-
mortar branches could have declined by
another 20%. The risk of widespread bank-
ing deserts may be a mirage. But small-
business lending could still suﬀer. 7

Financial innovation

Fighting disease with ﬁnance

The World Bank issues pandemic bonds 
WHEN the Ebola virus hit west Africa
in 2014, it took months to get togeth-
er the money needed to combat the
outbreak. Donors ended up committing
more than $7bn. But the money came too
late and too ineﬃciently, says Tim Evans,
who directs the World Bank’s global
health practice. Lives that could have
been saved were lost. The bank estimates
that GDP in Guinea, Liberia and Sierra
Leone was reduced by $2.8bn. 
Such outbreaks are likely to become
more common: they have increased in
frequency and diversity over the past 30
years, in step with the increased mobility
of people, products and food. The World
Bank says the probability of another
pandemic in the next 10 to 15 years is high.
That is why it has issued $425m in pan-
demic bonds to support its new Pandem-
ic Emergency Financing Facility (PEF),
which is intended to channel funding to
countries facing a deadly disease. 
The bonds cover six viruses likely to
spark outbreaks: new inﬂuenza viruses,
coronaviruses (like SARS and MERS),
ﬁloviruses (like Ebola), Lassa fever, Rift
Valley fever and Crimean Congo fever.
Investors forgo their principal when a
virus reaches a predetermined contagion
level, based on rate of growth, number of
deaths and whether it crosses interna-
tional borders. The facility covers 77 of
the world’s poorest countries. 
Using bonds to insure against crisis is
not a new idea. Catastrophe bonds, a
$29bn market, provide coverage against
hurricanes and earthquakes. But this is
the ﬁrst time that pandemic risk has been
transferred to ﬁnancial markets. Michael
Bennett, head of derivatives and struc-
tured ﬁnance in the World Bank’s trea-

Better coverage needed

sury department, says demand was
unexpectedly high: the transaction was
oversubscribed by 200%. Buyers ranged
from specialised catastrophe-bond in-
vestors to pension funds. 
But what if the pathogen is unknown,
as SARS was in 2002? The bank has
created a second ﬁnancing pool for that.
Designed to be more ﬂexible, it is not
linked to bond markets but relies on
money from bilateral donors. Germany
has provided an initial €50m ($59m). 
Whether or not the new facility ush-
ers in a market for pandemic insurance, it
is already spurring more advanced plan-
ning on the part of governments and
international responders. Rightly so.
“Moderately severe to severe” pandemics
cost an average of $570bn annually, or
0.7% of global GDP, according to the bank.
One as severe as the 1918 Spanish ﬂu
could cost 5% of global GDP. 

The Economist July 29th 2017 

Finance and economics 59

Free exchange

Too many quiet lives

Uncompetitive markets have macroeconomic consequences
“THE best of all monopoly proﬁts is a quiet life,” wrote Sir
John Hicks, a British economist. Without competitors
breathing down their necks, monopolists ﬁnd it easy to make
large proﬁts: just ask the 46m American households served by
only one fast-broadband provider, who pay high prices for poor
service. As a result, trustbusting is one of those rare causes that
can unite raging populists with sober academics. So the wonks
may well have agreed with the sentiment, if not the ﬁne detail,
when Senate Democrats unveiled a fresh pledge on July 24th to
make America competitive again as part of their economic agen-
da. “This economy is rigged,” insisted Senator Elizabeth Warren
of Massachusetts. It is not quite that bad. But more than three-
quarters of industries are more concentrated than they were two
decades ago, and the economy is also seeing less turnover of
ﬁrms (see charts). 
It is easy enough for consumers to see the consequences when
monopolists entrench themselves in one industry. A recent study
found that American consumers would gain $65bn a year if they
paid the same as Germans do for mobile-phone contracts. But
when competition ebbs across the economy as a whole, what
broader costs does that impose? New research by Germán Gutiér-
rez and Thomas Philippon of New York University (NYU) gives
an answer. Growing market power, they argue, has contributed
to a dearth of business investment that started in the 2000s and
worsened after the ﬁnancial crisis of 2007-08.
The promise of monopolies can encourage investment. The
lure of temporary exclusivity makes it worthwhile for the phar-
maceutical industry to research new drugs, which can sell for
next to nothing once patents expire. Silicon Valley investors burn
huge piles of cash in pursuit of “network eﬀects” and a user base
that might allow them to dominate markets later. Yet, once a ﬁrm
wins a power struggle, it can, like a medieval king, sit back and get
fat on the proceeds. 
Messrs Gutiérrez and Philippon benchmark investment
against “Tobin’s Q”, the ratio of a ﬁrm’s market value to its book
value. A high Q signals that an industry is earning a lot from its as-
sets, which, all else being equal, suggests it should invest more.
The authors show that America’s investment has fallen most sub-
stantially, relative to Q, in concentrated industries. In these sec-
tors, investment has also fallen more than in Europe.
To explore the issue further, the authors draw a distinction be-
tween “laggards” and “leaders”, deﬁned as ﬁrms comprising the

Concentrating too hard

United States, companies
Industr ies’ entry and exit rates, %

Entr y rate

Exit rate

0.16

0.14

0.12

0.10

0.08

0.06

Market concentration

1=monopoly

Her f indahl index*
adjusted for common
investor ownership

Her f indahl index*

1980 85 90 95 2000 05 10 14

1985 90 95 2000 05 10 15

0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0

Sources: “Declining Competition and
Investment in the US”, by G. Gutiérrez
and T. Philippon, 2017; Census Bureau

*The index is the sum of the squared market
shares of companies in each industr y.
The line is the average for all industr ies

top third and bottom third, respectively, of an industry’s market
value. Laggards, they reason, are more likely to wither in the face
of competition, so their investment might be expected to fall.
Leaders, though, should be up for a ﬁght if rivals challenge them;
their investment should rise. They ﬁnd it is leaders, not laggards,
who are responsible for the bulk of the investment slowdown,
suggesting a lack of competition.
These trends are only circumstantial evidence. To show that
competition causes higher investment, Messrs Gutiérrez and
Philippon appeal to two natural experiments. First, they study
manufacturers that were exposed to unexpected competition
from China as it gained a large share of world trade in the 2000s.
They ﬁnd that the “China shock” caused an investment gap to
open between leaders and laggards, as some ﬁrms tried to ﬁght
oﬀ the surge in imports and others folded. (Overall investment
fell; Messrs Gutiérrez and Philippon concede that this can hap-
pen when competition originates abroad.)
Next they examine a domestic shock—a wave of startups
founded during the 1990s tech boom. Amid the euphoria, new
ﬁrms giddily entered some industries at a rate that could not be
justiﬁed by economic conditions. The authors ﬁnd that the added
competition associated with “excess entry” did indeed spur in-
vestment during the subsequent decade.
These results suggest that Hicks was right. Declining competi-
tion does more than harm some consumers; it makes ﬁrms lazy.
The authors calculate that if leading ﬁrms had maintained their
share of overall investment since 2000, the American economy
would have 4% more capital today, an amount roughly equiva-
lent to two years’ investment by non-ﬁnancial companies. That
would have been good in itself, but more investment might also
have jolted the economy out of its slump after the ﬁnancial crisis.
From 2009 until the end of 2015, American interest rates were at
rock bottom. In another recent paper, Mr Philippon and Callum
Jones, also of NYU, argue that if competition had not declined
after 2000, investment spending would have lifted interest rates
oﬀ the ﬂoor fully four years earlier.

All ﬁrms aren’t created equal
Concentration may also hurt workers. Recent research by David
Autor of MIT and four co-authors ﬁnds that “superstar” ﬁrms pay
out less of their proﬁts in wages. As these ﬁrms have grown in im-
portance, labour’s overall share of GDP has fallen. Other research
suggests that these ﬁrms nonetheless pay more, in gross terms,
than ordinary ﬁrms, so their rise has directly contributed to in-
equality. This does not chime exactly with what Democrats
claimed this week—that America’s ﬁrms have too much power
over workers—but the end result, greater inequality, is similar.
The answer may seem obvious: toughen antitrust law. That
would indeed be welcome. But policymakers must also realise
where they need to regulate less. Matthew Rognlie, now of
Northwestern University, has shown that returns to capital have
gone up in large part because investing in housing has been so lu-
crative. That has a lot to do with constraints on development near
successful cities—a government barrier to entry. Messrs Gutiérrez
and Philippon ﬁnd evidence that concentration has risen most in
industries that have become more regulated. America must pro-
mote more competition. But it should also remember that no-
body has more power to rig an economy than the government. 7

Economist.com/blogs/freeexchange

60

Science and technology

The Economist July 29th 2017

Also in this section
61 Better ways of tunnelling
62 Serendipity and multiple sclerosis

Target recognition in war fare

Know your enemy

Soldiers’ brains are good at noticing threats. Technology could make them better
TWO millivolts is not much. But it is
of ten a second. That is too fast for con-
enough to show that someone has seen
scious recognition, because the brain’s at-
something even before he knows he has
tention will have moved on to the next im-
seen it himself. The two millivolts in ques-
age before consciousness can come into
tion are those associated with P300, a ﬂeet-
play. It is not, though, too fast for the initial
ing electrical signal produced by a human
stages of recognition, marked by a P300 sig-
brain which has just recognised an object it
nal, to occur when suspicious items are
has been seeking. Crucially, this signal is
present. Images that provoke such a signal
detectable by electrodes in contact with a
are then tagged for review. According to Dr
person’s scalp before he is consciously
Sajda, this triples the speed with which ob-
aware of having recognised anything.
jects of interest can be found. 
That observation is of great interest to
Speed is important, of course. But in
DARPA, the Defence Advanced Research
matters such as this, accuracy matters
Projects Agency, one of America’s military-
more. And some people think they can im-
research establishments. DARPA’s Neuro-
prove that, too—not by reading the brain,
technology for Intelligence Analysts pro-
but by stimulating it. Many studies have
gramme is dedicated to exploiting it in the
shown that zapping the brain with a weak
search for things like rocket launchers and
electric current, a procedure called trans-
roadside bombs in drone and satellite im-
cranial neuronal stimulation, enhances
agery. To that end it has been paying
what is known as “ﬂuid intelligence”. This
groups of researchers to look into ways of
is the ability to reason, as opposed merely
using P300 to cut human consciousness
to recall facts. Another American military-
out of the loop in such searches.
research establishment, the Intelligence
Among the beneﬁciaries are Robert
Advanced Research Projects Activity
Smith’s group at Honeywell Aerospace, in
(IARPA), hopes to exploit this phenome-
Phoenix, Arizona, and Paul Sajda’s at Neu-
non for the purpose of target identiﬁcation. 
romatters, in New York. Both of the “image
The notion of bathing brains in electric-
triage systems” designed by these groups
ity spooks some. But with a current of just
require the humans in them to wear spe-
two milliamps, the stimulation is painless
cial skull-enclosing caps (see picture). Each
and safe, says Vincent Clark, a neuroscien-
cap is ﬁtted with 32 electrodes that record
tist at the University of New Mexico. In a
the brain’s electrical responses to whatev-
project paid for in part by IARPA, he and his
er stimuli it is subjected to. Wearers have
team have stimulated the brains of more
pictures ﬂashed before their eyes at the rate
than 1,000 volunteers using a 9V battery

For daily analysis and debate on science and
technology, visit
Economist.com/science

connected to electrodes on the scalp. After
half an hour of stimulation, volunteers
spot in test photographs 13% more snipers,
makeshift bombs and the like than do vol-
unteers given a “sham” current of 100
microamps (5% of the experimental cur-
rent) that mimics the skin-tingling induced
by the experimental current. 
Placing one of the electrodes on a vol-
unteer’s arm boosts the phenomenon still
further, according to Andy McKinley, head
of brain stimulation at the American Air
Force’s Human Eﬀectiveness Directorate at
Wright-Patterson, an air base in Ohio. This
way, current travelling from one electrode
to the other passes through more brain tis-
sue than it otherwise would. Six hours
after about 25 minutes of such stimulation,
those so treated spot twice as many tanks,
missile launchers and other targets in im-
ages as control groups manage to. 
Nor do volunteers in these sorts of ex-
periments seem to suﬀer ill eﬀects. Accord-
ing to Dr Clark, the stimulation he uses
makes a few feel drowsy, but most enjoy “a
very deep mindful state”. Curiously, Dr
McKinley reports almost the opposite. He
says of his volunteers that when deprived
of sleep they stay alert and cheerful longer.
Some, he says, “feel like they’ve just had a
bunch of caﬀeine”. 

May the Force be with you
Sitting in a comfortable chair watching a
computer screen, albeit while wearing a
device that looks as if it was invented by a
mad hairdresser, is one thing. Doing some-
thing similar while on patrol or dug into a
foxhole is quite another. Yet this, too, is on
DARPA’s metaphorical radar screen. The
Cognitive Technology Threat Warning Sys-
tem, known to its friends as “Luke’s binoc-
ulars” (a reference to Luke Skywalker, a
character in the “Star Wars” movies), is an 

1

Science and technology 61

cast concrete sections.
Slow, this process certainly is. The bor-
ing machines employed to construct the
tunnels for Crossrail, a new railway under
London which should open next year, cut
through the strata they were faced with at a
rate of around a metre an hour—literally a
snail’s pace. As to expense, Crossrail re-
quired eight boring machines, each of
which cost around $15m in 2012, when tun-
nelling started. Each also needed to be su-
pervised by a gang of up to a dozen people
on board, adding to costs. The total bill for
Crossrail’s tunnelling was £1.5bn ($2.4bn).
This bought 42km of tunnels (21km each
for the eastbound and westbound tracks);
the longest individual tunnels (8.3km each)
took 2½ years to dig. 
The Boring Company thinks it can
speed this sort of operation up, and also
cut costs. To do so it plans to make boring
machines more powerful, so that they can
cut through material faster. It also wants to
automate things, to reduce labour costs,
and to line the tunnel as the machines pro-
gress, instead of stopping excavation when
linings are added. One idea is to compact
the spoil into bricks and use those as lining
material. Reducing the diameter of tunnels
would also help. That is part of the reason-
ing for putting cars on sledges. A two-lane
road tunnel needs to be about 8.5 metres
wide. Crossrail, at around seven metres, is
slightly narrower. But a sledge tunnel
could be a single lane, because the sledges
can be packed close together and so do not
need as much space. It could thus work
with a diameter of four metres, cutting
costs by as much as three-quarters.
No one could ever accuse Mr Musk of
not thinking big. But tunnels do not neces-
sarily need to be big to be useful. BADGER
is being designed speciﬁcally for small-di-
ameter tasks, such as digging conduits for
cables and pipes. The initial plan, accord-
ing to the project’s co-ordinator, Carlos Ba-
laguer of Carlos III University, in Madrid, is 

1

The Economist July 29th 2017 

2 attempt to take the idea of boosting target
recognition into the ﬁeld. 
Luke’s binoculars, developed as part of
a joint venture between Boeing and Gen-
eral Motors, combine image triage with
360° vision. Once again, participants must
wear electrode skull caps. Actual binocu-
lars are not involved, though. Instead, the
cap-wearer looks at a screen which is being
fed, in rotation and every tenth of a sec-
ond, the images from six cameras, 60°
apart, surrounding his position. If one of
these images stimulates a P300 signal in
his brain the system alerts him and lets
him look properly at the image in question.
In tests, people using Luke’s binoculars
spot nearly twice as many threats as those
scanning their surroundings with conven-
tional ﬁeld glasses.
Reading brain signals might also help
prevent the misidentiﬁcation as targets of
troops that are on the same side as the cap

wearer—and thus reduce incidents of
death by “friendly ﬁre”. In conjunction
with the Australian and British defence
ministries, America’s Army Research Lab-
oratory, in Maryland, is analysing the
brain’s alpha, beta, delta and gamma
waves. These, unlike P300, are always run-
ning. But their strengths and frequencies
vary according to what the brain is up to. 
After deciding that he has seen an ene-
my, a soldier with his ﬁnger on the trigger
takes between 400 and 450 milliseconds to
pull it. But what if he changes his mind dur-
ing that period? According to Jean Vettel, a
neuroscientist who is working on the pro-
ject, brainwave data can indicate that he
has realised he has made a mistake in as lit-
tle as 200 milliseconds. This should be
enough time for a shot to be blocked by dis-
abling the ﬁring mechanism automatically,
and for a comrade’s life thus to be saved.
That idea really is a brainwave. 7

Bor ing technology

Underground adventures

pipes, cables, the foundations of buildings
and even buried boulders.
Existing tunnel-boring machines are, in
eﬀect, building sites on rails. At the front, a
cutting wheel with a diameter a little larger
than that of the ﬁnal tunnel (to allow for
the thickness of the lining) is pushed for-
ward by pistons and chews away at soil
and rock as it travels. The spoil from this ex-
cavation is then taken to the surface by con-
veyor belts. Once enough material has
been cleared, the borer is stopped and the
newly exposed section is lined with pre-

The search for quicker, cheaper ways of tunnelling 
ABIG hole in the car park at SpaceX’s
headquarters in Los Angeles is the ﬁrst
visible evidence of another of Elon Musk’s
ventures. Mr Musk who, besides leading
SpaceX, a rocket company, also runs Tesla,
a maker of electric cars, is going into the
tunnelling business. The goal of the Boring
Company, as he dubs his new enterprise, is
to dig tunnels faster and more cheaply
than is possible at the moment. 
Apart from the pit in the car park, Mr
Musk says he has also begun a series of test
tunnels for a project that will, if it comes to
fruition, carry cars under Los Angeles on
high-speed sledges, in order to avoid the
dreadful traﬃc jams above. More ambi-
tiously, he claims to have oﬃcial support
for a 320km (200-mile) tunnel that would,
in half an hour, whisk people between
New York and Washington, DC, in magnet-
ically propelled capsules, using a technol-
ogy he has dubbed the hyperloop.
Loopy these ideas may sound, but Mr
Musk is surely right about one thing—that
tunnelling, which is currently slow and ex-
pensive, is a technology ripe for innova-
tion. And he is not the only one who thinks
so. In Europe, things are also stirring be-
neath the surface. In January a consortium
of academic and commercial researchers
began work on a project called BADGER.
This is intended to develop a robot tunnell-
ing machine (albeit one for tunnels much
smaller than Mr Musk has in mind) that
can detect and avoid obstacles such as

How the past saw the future of tunnelling

62 Science and technology

2 for the machine to burrow at depths of up
to four metres, at speeds of around two
metres an hour. If that works, it should
then be possible to increase both speed
and scale. 
BADGER’s face will combine a conven-
tional rotary cutting head with an ultra-
sonic drill, which will pulverise rock with
high-frequency sound waves. As with ex-
isting machines, the spoil will then be sent
to the surface. Unlike existing machines,
however, BADGER will move forward not
as a rigid unit, but like a worm. The rear sec-
tion will clamp itself to the wall of the
newly cut tunnel and push the front sec-
tion forward. The forward section will
then clamp itself and pull up the rear. And

so on. As it advances, BADGER will line the
tunnel behind it using a 3D printer. One
idea is to print the wall with plastic, so that
the result resembles a conventional pipe.
BADGER will navigate using various
sensors including, crucially, ground-pene-
trating radar. This will enable it to operate
autonomously and detect potential obsta-
cles before it reaches them, so that it can
steer around them. The great beneﬁt of
BADGER is being able to excavate tunnels
below busy cities without closing roads to
dig trenches—thus avoiding making the
traﬃc jams about which Mr Musk com-
plains even worse. Whether the tunnels
are straight or loopy, though, the future of
tunnelling will be anything but boring. 7

Multiple sclerosis

Unexpected protection

A chance ﬁnding may lead to a treatment for a terrible illness
EXPERIMENTS that go according to plan
of MS the targets of these attacks, which
can be useful. But the biggest scientiﬁc
may continue for years, are the fatty
advances often emerge from those that do
sheaths that insulate nerve cells and thus
not. Such is the case with a study just re-
help nervous impulses to propagate. Peo-
ple suﬀering from MS are often weakened,
ported in the Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences. When they began it,
and sometimes physically disabled by it,
Hector DeLuca of the University of Wis-
and may also become blind. 
consin, Madison, and his colleagues had
What drives the immune system to be-
been intending to examine the eﬀects of ul-
have in this way remains mysterious, but
traviolet (UV) light on mice suﬀering from a
in the 1970s researchers uncovered a pro-
rodent version of multiple sclerosis (MS).
mising clue when they noticed that MS is
By the project’s end, however, they had in
rarer near the equator than it is at high lat-
their hands two substances which may
itudes. The ﬁrst hypothesis proposed to ex-
prove valuable drugs against the illness. 
plain this observation was that vitamin D
Multiple sclerosis is an autoimmune
(a substance created by sunlight’s action
disease. This means it is caused by a vic-
on precursor molecules in the skin) might
be helping to prevent MS. That made sense,
tim’s immune system turning on and de-
stroying parts of his own body. In the case
since those living in the tropics receive

The Economist July 29th 2017

more sunlight than do those in temperate
zones. Sadly, follow-up experiments failed
to support the notion. Those experiments
did, though, lead Dr DeLuca to discover
that the preventive eﬀect is associated with
a particular sort of sunlight—UV with a
wavelength of between 300 and 315 nano-
metres (billionths of a metre). 
His latest experiment was intended to
dig deeper into this observation, by using
this type of light to irradiate mice that had
been injected with chemicals known to
cause the rodent equivalent of MS. In a pre-
liminary study he and his colleagues there-
fore shaved the backs of 12 of these mice
and exposed them to UV of the appropri-
ate wavelength every day for a month. To
be useful, an experiment like this needs
controls with which its results can be com-
pared. Dr DeLuca devised three of these. In
one, he applied one of six types of sun-
screen to a dozen other shaved mice before
exposing them to the ultraviolet rays. To
another dozen he applied the sunscreen
but not the ultraviolet. And a ﬁnal 12,
though also shaved, were neither exposed
to UV nor slathered with sunscreen. He
then monitored all four groups for signs of
murine multiple sclerosis, such as loss of
tail tone, unsteady gait and limb paralysis, 
When the experiment began, he and
his colleagues expected that the disease
would progress more slowly in the experi-
mental group than in the control groups,
and that its rate of progress in all three con-
trol groups would be the same, since any
eﬀect of exposure to ultraviolet would be
negated by the sunscreen. But that was not
what happened. Instead, three of the six
types of sunscreen served to suppress the
disease’s progression by themselves—that
is, even in animals not exposed to UV. In-
deed, one of them, Coppertone, was as ef-
fective at doing so as ultraviolet light alone. 
In light of this Dr DeLuca and his col-
leagues carried out further experiments,
which conﬁrmed the initial ﬁndings. They
also studied the ingredients lists of the
three protective sunscreens and tested
each of the compounds therein, one at a
time, on other batches of mice. This re-
vealed that two of these compounds, ho-
mosalate and octisalate, were particularly
eﬀective at keeping the rodent version of
multiple sclerosis in check. 
Why these particular substances sup-
press MS remains to be discovered. Dr De-
Luca suspects that it has to do with their
ability to inhibit production of cyclo-
oxygenase, an enzyme commonly found
in the lesions characteristic of multiple
sclerosis. But regardless of the mechanism,
if homosalate and octisalate, or other mol-
ecules similar to them, can suppress the
progression of the disease in people as ef-
fectively as they do in rodents it will be a
signal example both of the role of ser-
endipity in science and of the crucial im-
portance of doing proper controls. 7

Books and arts

Southern food

Meat and greet

The Cooking Gene: A Journey Through
Afr ican-Amer ican Culinar y Histor y in

the Old South. By Michael Twitty.
Amistad; 464 pages; $28.99

Penguin Press; 384 pages; $28

The Potlikker Papers: A Food Histor y of
the Modern South. By John Edge.

Two new books tackle race and American history around the table
SOUTHERN American food’s most
famous ambassador is Harland Sand-
ers, the white-coated, goateed marketing 
genius whose recipe for pressure-fried
chicken became Kentucky Fried Chicken.
Sanders hated the chain’s food, calling its
heavily breaded birds a “damn fried
doughball put on top of some chicken”.
What he loved was the chicken of his
youth, which had almost certainly been
prepared by black hands. Southern food,
explained Edna Lewis, America’s most
lyrical cookery writer, is “mostly black, 
because blacks—black women and black
men—did most of the cooking in private
homes, hotels and on the railroads.” 
Michael Twitty runs with this thesis in
“The Cooking Gene”, a sprawling blend of
culinary history, memoir, travel writing
and personal narrative. Mr Twitty contains
multitudes: he is a gay, African-American
convert to Judaism who taught Hebrew to
white children from suburban Washing-
ton, DC. He is a proliﬁc blogger and tweet-
er, and he stages historical cooking demon-
strations, dressing in “transformative
historical drag” and using 18th- and 19th-
century recipes and cooking methods. 
The book’s central argument is Lewis’s,
but extended: Southern cuisine’s roots are
not merely African-American, but African.
Africans imported some of its deﬁning in-
gredients—okra, peanuts and sorghum, for
instance—and African skills and labour
produced the crops. He structures this

story as a series of chapter-length digres-
sions on themes—his conversion to Juda-
ism, his search for his white ancestors, the
crops that slaves farmed—rather than as a
straightforward, historical narrative. 
He has the autodidact’s love of learn-
ing; throughout
the book he scatters
extended explanations of agricultural 
processes—how rice is cultivated, how sor-
ghum is processed, how it feels to pick cot-
ton. His research into his family is inten-
sive, and he oﬀers vivid portraits of his
forebears throughout—none more so than
his great-grandfather Joe Todd, a Virginian
who used to cock his shotgun at intimida-
tors from the Ku Klux Klan. (“If they come
to kill me”, his daughter recalls him saying,
“I’ll take them to hell with me, but as for me
and my house, we shall not live in hell”).
This book is deeply personal, so Mr
Twitty himself—his voice, concerns, quirks
and thoughts—is a dominant presence. For-
tunately, he is engaging, wry and ﬁzzingly
curious. And he is a well-trained show-
man. His path to writing began with his

The Economist July 29th 2017 63

Also in this section
64 The dark histor y of St Petersburg
64 Dalits in India
65 Of pigs and birds
66 Wayne McGregor’s choreography

For daily analysis and debate on books, ar ts and
culture, visit
Economist.com/culture

“Southern Discomfort Tour”, a series of
live cooking demonstrations around the
South; he knows how to hold an audience.
At times the book threatens to dissolve into
discursive chaos, but American culinary
history and race relations are messy sub-
jects, and Mr Twitty deserves credit for 
diving headlong into both of them.
John Edge’s work, “The Potlikker
Papers”, is a far tidier aﬀair. Divided into
ﬁve sections, it uses food to tell the history
of the American South from the mid-1950s,
when the bus boycotts began in Mont-
gomery, Alabama, to today. He paints a
wonderfully vibrant portrait of Gloria 
Gilmore, who fed early civil-rights leaders
out of her kitchen, and explains how
Lyndon Johnson used to describe the toilet
arrangements that segregation imposed
on his cook, Zephyr Wright, to make the 
indignities of segregation vivid to his
white interlocutors. 
Writing in the late 20th century, Lewis
worried that homogenisation would even-
tually destroy southern cuisine. Mr Edge’s
later chapters dispel such fears. Driven by
immigrants, ﬁve of America’s ten fastest-
growing cities are in southern states. The
incomers are building on the African and
African-American foundation that Lewis
and Mr Twitty delineate. Indian-Housto-
nians serve grits spiked with coriander
and across southern Louisiana, banh mi
(Vietnamese pork pâté sandwiches on ba-
guettes) are sold as “Vietnamese po’ boys”.
Meanwhile, the Buford Highway in Atlan-
ta, once a poky road of car-repair shops
dwindling into farmland, is now lined
with restaurants from dozens of countries.
Inevitably, they are leaving their mark on
regional cuisine. Some may howl, but as
Mr Edge writes, “Southern food has never
been static…[Traditionalists] feared for the
‘southern way of life’, then stammered
when asked to deﬁne it.” 7

64 Books and arts

St Petersburg

White nights, dark
history

St Petersburg: Three Centur ies of Murderous

Desire. By Jonathan Miles. Random House;
488 pages; £25. To be published in Amer ica
by Pegasus in March 2018
ANNA AKHMATOVA, one of Russia’s
ﬁnest 20th-century poets, once de-
scribed St Petersburg as being “particularly
well suited to catastrophes”. Founded in
1703, the city went on to experience two
historical traumas—the Russian revolution
and the siege of Leningrad, as it was
known under the Soviets. In his new bio-
graphy of the tormented delta, Jonathan
Miles, a British cultural historian, manoeu-
vres swiftly through these tragedies, devot-
ing the bulk of his attention to the social
and cultural 
life beneath 
the city’s
“spiders’ webs of tramlines”. 
By almost every measure St Petersburg
is a haunted metropolis. The windswept
city built on the mouth of the Neva is prone
to ﬂooding, as is vividly described in Push-
kin’s “The Bronze Horseman”, the greatest
literary tribute to Peter the Great’s austere
and splendid creation. The city stands as a
testament to the manic ambitions of a
ruthless and visionary tsar who showed
no regard for human life in his bid to west-
ernise Russia. 
At the end of the 17th century Peter trav-
elled to several European capitals, includ-
ing Riga and London. He also went to the
Netherlands to learn at ﬁrst hand about
Dutch shipbuilding techniques—part of an
eﬀort to strengthen his naval campaign
against Russia’s Ottoman neighbours. He
returned home determined to build a new
capital city of harbours and canals in the
mould of Amsterdam which, unlike land-
locked Moscow, could welcome ships from
across the world. St Petersburg would be
Peter’s “window to Europe”. 
Mr Miles estimates that 30,000 people
died, many of them succumbing to malar-
ia, scurvy and dysentery, during the initial
construction, while others were torn apart
by packs of wolves in broad daylight. It is
unlikely that such suﬀering bothered the
tsar, who enjoyed executing criminals and
traitors in public. Peter coerced wealthy
Muscovites to move to his new capital,
threatening them with the loss of their ti-
tles if they did not comply. European art,
culture and trade were in vogue, but Euro-
pean liberalism was kept at arm’s length
and would remain so for hundreds of
years to come. 
Rather than focus on the revolution, the
centenary of which falls this year, Mr Miles
writes mostly of its eﬀects on people. Be-
tween 1917 and the early 1920s, as Lenin

moved the government back to Moscow,
the population of the city, now renamed
Petrograd, fell from 2.5m to 740,000 as food
became scarce and violence and killing
spread as a result of the revolution and the
ensuing civil war. 
The decision to relocate the capital was
vindicated when the Nazis laid siege to the
city, which had been renamed Leningrad
in 1924. Hitler was determined to wipe
from the map this cradle of communism: it
was a base for the Baltic Sea ﬂeet and one
of the most important industrial centres in
the Soviet Union. The 900-day siege led to
mass starvation so severe that some peo-
ple began to eat the ﬂesh of the dead. In just
one month towards the end of 1941, 50,000
people starved to death. The city where
Shostakovich composed his famous “Len-
ingrad Symphony” became a symbol of re-
sistance and the strength of the human
spirit—something that Stalin and subse-
quent Soviet rulers deeply feared. Indeed,
when a museum dedicated to the suﬀering
of the besieged opened up, it was immedi-
ately shut down and its directors arrested.
The city was subjected to one of the worst
post-war purges by Stalin and was side-
lined economically and politically for
years afterwards. 
St Petersburg today is as paradoxical as
it has ever been. As the childhood home of
Vladimir Putin, it has been promoted by
the Kremlin as a symbol of Russian imperi-
al splendour and ambition. At the same
time it has also become a centre of resis-
tance to the Kremlin’s attempt to impose its
will and subvert the city’s independence
and spirit. Mr Miles’s aﬀectionate history
serves as a lively contribution to percep-
tions of the city’s allure. 7

Peter on his high horse

The Economist July 29th 2017

Dalits in India

The lowest caste

Ants Among Elephants: An Untouchable
Family and the Making of Modern India. By

Sujatha Gidla. Farrar, Straus and Giroux; 320
pages; $28 
ONE in six Indians is a Dalit, which
means “oppressed” in Sanskrit. That
is to say, 200m Indians belong to a commu-
nity deemed so impure by the scriptures
that they are placed outside the hierarchi-
cal Hindu caste system and are commonly
called “untouchable”. Upper-caste Hindus
traditionally treated untouchables as
agents of pollution. To come into contact
with them was to be deﬁled, they believed.
Indian villages depended on untouch-
ables to provide ﬁeld labour and clear
away human waste. Yet untouchables
were excluded from village life. They could
not—and often still cannot—enter Hindu
temples, draw water from common wells,
touch caste Hindus or even live inside the
village. Punishments for breaching caste
boundaries are severe.
Many untouchables, lured by Western
missionaries, embraced Christianity. But
they remained poor and socially ostra-
cised. Caste, far from being purged, be-
came a characteristic of Indian Christian-
ity and Buddhism. Indeed, no religion in
India was able fully to transcend the social
divisions entrenched by Hinduism. Conse-
quently, almost every religion in India cul-
tivated its own caste system. Dalits, regard-
less of their religion, were expected at all
times to appease caste Hindus by acting
out their lowly status. Every aspect of their
demeanour, from posture to speech, had to
be modulated to convey unstinting subser-
vience to the upper castes.
As a young girl, in Andhra Pradesh, 
Sujatha Gidla remembers adult members
of her educated Christian untouchable
family “scrambling to their feet” whenever
a Hindu materialised before them. India’s
constitution, drafted 
in 1947 by B.R. 
Ambedkar, a formidably educated Dalit
lawyer, outlawed caste-based discrimina-
tion and made provisions for the advance-
ment of untouchables through aﬃrmative
action. “Ants Among Elephants”, Ms
Gidla’s stirring memoir, chronicles her
family’s experience of the contest between
modern India’s civilising aspirations and
the savagery of a decaying but persistent
old India. 
Ms Gidla’s grandfather had been edu-
cated by Canadian missionaries. But when
driven from his village on account of his
untouchability, he enlisted in the British 
Indian Army and in the early 1940s was
dispatched to Iraq. The author vividly 

1

The Economist July 29th 2017 

2 reconstructs the early lives of the children
her grandfather left behind. They grew up
against the backdrop of the nationalist
clamour for freedom. Satyamurthy, the el-
dest son, welcomed India’s independence
from Britain. But his belief in democracy
was short-lived. Satyamurthy was a bril-
liant but restless man. In his college library
he discovered Telugu poetry, which was
known for its rousing and romantic quali-
ties. He became a propagandist for com-
munists, venerated Chairman Mao and
yearned for revolution.
In telling Satyamurthy’s story, Ms Gidla
recounts the history of India from the
viewpoint of the very bottom of society.
Satyamurthy, fully radicalised by middle
age, disappeared into the dense jungles of
central India. From there he co-directed an
armed insurgency aimed at overthrowing
the Indian state. Eventually he learned that
his upper-caste Maoist comrades had all
along been uncomfortable at being led by
an untouchable. He was expelled when he
raised the issue.
Ms Gidla at times devotes pages to do-
mestic squabbles, but she is also capable
of hauntingly evocative images. Consider
her description of the ﬁnal parting of Sa-
tyamurthy and his wife Maniamma: “She
came to see him oﬀ at the station. As the
train pulled away, she stood under a lamp
in a blue sari with the ﬂowers he’d bought
her in her hair. Under the dim light she
waved to him with a smile on her lips”. 
Satyamurthy is the main subject of this
book. But it is Ms Gidla’s mother (and 
Satyamurthy’s younger sister), Manjula,
who is the true heroine of the story. She
faced discrimination on two counts: caste
and sex. Yet she put herself through univer-
sity, put up with a repressive husband, be-
came a lecturer and brought up three chil-
dren. Satyamurthy, having retreated into
the jungle, returned with little to show for
his years of violent campaigns. The family
he left behind, enduring hardships but
nonetheless engaging with the world
around them, inched forward. The Gidla
family now includes professionals trained
at India’s ﬁnest public institutions (the au-
thor was a research associate at the ac-
claimed Indian Institute of Technology
Madras, the Indian equivalent of Caltech;
her sister was a medical student.)
Ms Gidla herself, having once been ar-
rested and tortured by the Indian police for
taking part in student politics, disavows
her uncle’s methods in the book’s epi-
logue. She spent years at the Bank of New
York, but was laid oﬀ during the ﬁnancial
crisis and now works as a conductor on the
New York subway. “Ants Among Ele-
phants” is an arresting, aﬀecting and ulti-
mately enlightening memoir. It is quite
possibly the most striking work of non-ﬁc-
tion set in India since “Behind the Beautiful
Forevers” by Katherine Boo, and heralds
the arrival of a formidable new writer. 7

Animal wr iting

Creature consorts

Big Pig, Little Pig: A Tale of Two Pigs in

France. By Jacqueline Yallop. Fig Tree; 240
pages; £14.99

As Kingﬁshers Catch Fire: Birds and Books.

By Alex Preston and Neil Gower. Little Brown;
200 pages; £25
DO PEOPLE really know the animals
they love? The question gnaws at a
pair of memoirs published this month:
“Big Pig, Little Pig”, Jacqueline Yallop’s
account of raising two porkers in rural
France, and “As Kingﬁshers Catch Fire”, a
meditation by Alex Preston on a lifelong
obsession with birds. Both authors are lec-
turers in creative writing and each has pro-
duced three novels. They are beady-eyed
observers of their chosen creatures, the
landscapes they occupy and their histori-
cal importance to humans. Their stories,
however, are strikingly diﬀerent.
Ms Yallop’s tale begins on her 40th
birthday, as she and her husband put the
ﬁnishing touches to a pig shelter near their
house in Aveyron, a rugged part of France.
Her interest in animals is a new one. She
grew up without them in the suburbs of
northern England, and moved to the farm-
house in the Languedoc only in her 30s,
after realising that her books and her hus-
band’s journalism could support a life in
the countryside. Their hogs are a project in
authenticity, a commitment to a land in
which there are supposedly more villages

Books and arts 65

named after pig farming than anything
else. That means killing them, too.
Tending to the pigs, two gascon noir
boars that eventually bulk up to 170kg, is
like “an executioner falling for someone on
death row”. Their names are simply “Big
Pig” and “Little Pig”, to avoid too much at-
tachment, but Ms Yallop soon recognises
their distinct personalities. Big Pig is loyal,
sensible and stately, whereas Little Pig is
scatty, selﬁsh and lazy. The 12 months of
their lives are narrated with interludes
about the Learned Pig, a mind-reading per-
forming animal that became a celebrity in
the 1780s, and vignettes of rustic France,
where “the old pig-keeping ways” are dy-
ing out. Ms Yallop’s main theme, however,
is “the puzzle of anthropomorphism” and
“how much animal instinct can look like
human thought or emotion”. Only after
sombrely slaughtering her beloved oinkers
and turning them into sausages does she
truly understand that each pig is “an intelli-
gent, sentient, unique animal, but an ani-
mal, nonetheless”.
Mr Preston’s book is, in his own words,
as much an anthology and work of criti-
cism as a memoir. His fascination with
birds began at the age of seven, upon see-
ing a peregrine swoop “like the head of a
shovel ﬂung from the heavens”. That de-
scription has the freshness of a child look-
ing to the skies, but the author quickly
comes to rely on the words of others for his
essays. Each of his 21 chapters is devoted to
one species—beautifully illustrated by Neil
Gower—which is helpful for those with a
limited knowledge of ornithology. Most
have an anecdote about the bird’s place in
the author’s life: the starlings that swarmed
over childhood games of cricket, the swifts
that soared above a teenage ﬂat in Paris, the
goldﬁnches in Notting Hill that twittered
on the tired walk home from his work as a
banker. But these are snippets among a
nest of literary clippings, pecked from 25
years of notes. If a memorable line has
been written about a bird, it is probably in
this book. The best avian writers “brighten
birds in our minds, adding new layers of
feeling, of understanding, of love”.
The title itself comes from a sonnet by
Gerard Manley Hopkins, a Victorian poet
of God-in-Nature, which asserts that each
created thing has an individual self, “that
being indoors each one dwells”. Mr Pres-
ton shows that the sharpest birdwatchers
capture that individual spirit, which Hop-
kins called an “inscape”. John Clare, D.H.
Lawrence and Ted Hughes are among the
most prominent examples. Yet he also says
that these feathered friends resist anthro-
pomorphism, since they are skittish and
nomadic. Among the odes to their allure is
a fear of “the ultimate meaninglessness of
the birds”, and “how little they care about
the men who pin their hopes on mere
song”. These books are as much about
human nature as animal spirits. 7

66 Books and arts

Contemporar y choreography

Man on a mission

“buuu”—that are all but unintelligible to
the uninitiated, yet comprehensible to the
company themselves.
Then there are the neighbours. The
soaring white spaces of Studio Wayne
McGregor are housed within Here East, a
complex that measures 1.2m square feet
(111,484 square metres). Built in the former
press and broadcasting centre of the 2012
Olympics, it now plays host to start-ups
and established companies from the
worlds of science, technology and sport, as
well as academe. It is unusual for an arts
ensemble to sit cheek-by-jowl with such
organisations, but the proximity serves Mr
McGregor’s restless curiosity. It is, he says
proudly, the most “technologically literate”
building in Europe, and is already giving
rise to new partnerships. The company re-
cently ﬁnished ﬁlming his ballet “Atomos”,
using the state-of-the-art studios of one of
their housemates, BT Sport (and with the
dancers sporting wearable technology de-
veloped by another). In the autumn, when

Wayne McGregor is determined to bring new meaning to dance
THE Wellcome Genome Campus, the
Sanger Institute and the European
Bioinformatics Institute are unlikely places
to ﬁnd a choreographer at work. But such
research hubs turn out to be a natural habi-
tat for Wayne McGregor. For more than
two decades, the British choreographer
has been using dancers to explore cogni-
tion, mathematics, neuroscience, astrono-
my, even modernist
literature. (“Woolf
Works”, a recent award-winning triptych
for the Royal Ballet, was based on three
novels by Virginia Woolf.) 
Mr McGregor’s distinctive work can do
grandeur and it can do melancholy. It can
do mischief and it can do heartbreak. But
he always tackles big ideas head-on. Hav-
ing his genome sequenced in order to turn
the data into dance might sound strange.
For Mr McGregor, it is a logical next step. 
“Autobiography” will be unveiled at
Sadler’s Wells in London later this year. It is
a co-production with Les Théâtres de la
Ville de Luxembourg, the Edinburgh Inter-
national Festival and Festspielhaus St Pol-
ten in Austria. Mr McGregor, who has been
resident choreographer at the Royal Ballet
since 2006 and is also an associate artist at
Sadler’s Wells, regularly works with the
Bolshoi and the New York City Ballet, as
well as the Royal Danish, San Francisco
and Paris Opera ballet companies. He has,
in other words, his pick of the ﬁnest dan-
cers from around the globe. But perhaps
appropriately, for a subject so close to
home, “Autobiography” is being brought to
life by his own troupe, Company Wayne
McGregor.
It is the ﬁrst piece Mr McGregor has
started to develop since moving his com-
pany into its spectacular new home in east
London. On a balmy recent evening the
still-boyish 46-year-old was brimming
with enthusiasm. The vast, cathedral-like
studio represents a landmark achievement
for the previously itinerant company. First,
there is the holistic (and rare) luxury of
having everything under one roof: the 
dancers arrive early, use the gym, take a
company warm-up class and move seam-
lessly into one of the three capacious 
studios to start work. Watching Mr McGre-
gor in action as a choreographer is educa-
tive. Rather than dictate a move or a step,
he works closely with the dancer’s body or
“physical signature”, and communicates
his ideas using a vocabulary of ﬂuid physi-
cal gestures and expressive but non-
linguistic noises—such as “shway” or

A leg up for dance

The Economist July 29th 2017

University College London opens its new
campus in the building, Mr McGregor will
take part in a lecture series about architec-
ture and robotics. And so on.
These are rich pickings for a man who
has always placed unexpected collabora-
tion at the centre of his artistic practice.
Across ballet, modern dance, theatre, 
opera and video, Mr McGregor’s many
co-conspirators include pop singers, com-
posers, fashion designers, novelists—even
wizards; Mr McGregor was the choreogra-
pher for the ﬁlm of “Harry Potter and the
Goblet of Fire”. 
Eyebrows were raised when he was
ﬁrst appointed to the Royal Ballet: he had
never had a day’s classical training in his
life, and rather than insist on traditional
ballet steps, he demands that his dancers
contort
themselves
into 
improbable,
sculptural shapes to achieve the breathtak-
ing eﬀects they do. But even the purists of
Covent Garden have embraced Mr McGre-
gor as a hero. He has transformed the ener-
gy of the company over the past decade,
and the dancers revere him. Some Royal
Ballet members have even chosen to
spend the summer hanging out at Studio
Wayne McGregor.
No wonder. The choreographer has
long believed in “colliding diﬀerent sorts
of intelligence in one place”. Increasingly,
academic research suggests that creative
imagination is impossible without col-
laboration: such ﬁndings are being em-
braced by organisations such as Second
Home, which oﬀers cross-disciplinary co-
working opportunities in London and Lis-
bon (and claims its businesses grow ten
times faster as a result) or Pioneer Works in
Brooklyn, whose international residency
programme provides free space to creators
across the arts, science and technology.
Radically for London, a city where studio
rents can run to £2,000 ($2,604) a week,
Studio Wayne McGregor is oﬀering free
space for up to ﬁve weeks for around 25 art-
ists a year, in exchange for working on local
education and outreach projects. With cre-
ative artists being priced out of the capital
every day, this idea oﬀers an important 
opportunity for emerging artists, and also
represents good news for dance’s future.
“Autobiography” will incorporate one
of the hottest technologies of the moment:
artiﬁcial intelligence. Mr McGregor
is
working with Google to explore how
advanced machine learning can create a
“living archive”, which mines all his
choreographic steps, going back more than
a quarter of a century, even to childhood,
“to see what happens when a machine
learns your choreography and how it may
predict what happens next”. He is in-
trigued, he says, by the idea of an archive
“as a living and breathing asset, one that 
incorporates the past but looks to the fu-
ture”. It is hard to think of a better deﬁni-
tion of Mr McGregor himself. 7

Tenders

Courses

67

NOTICE OF OPEN INTERNATIONAL TENDER (RE-ADVERTISEMENT)

Kenya Tourism Board (KTB) invites sealed bids from eligible Agencies for the below 
services that will be undertaken in its priority markets globally:
TENDER NO.  
TENDER NAME 
BID SECURITY 
KTB/T/003/
 Provision of destination
USD 2,500.00
2017-2018
 Marketing  Agency services
 KTB/T/005/
 Provision of global advertising
2017-2018
 and media Agency services
KTB/T/004/
 Provision of Global PR and
2017-2018
 Media Relations services

CLOSING DATE
16/08/2017 at 12.00
noon Kenyan time
16/08/2017 at 12.00
noon Kenyan time
16/08/2017 at 12.00
noon Kenyan time

USD 1,000.00

USD 1,000.00

Interested eligible tenderers may obtain further information from, and inspect the 
tender document at our ofﬁ ces Kenya Tourism Board, Kenya Re towers, off Ragati 
Road, Upper hill 7th and 8th ﬂ oor w.e.f Wednesday 26th July, 2017 from 8.00 a.m 
– 2.00 p.m. and 2.00 p.m - 5.00 p.m. on Mondays to Fridays inclusive except on 
public holidays.

     A complete set of tender document(s) in English may be obtained by interested 
tenderers at the address given above upon payment of a non- refundable fee of 
Kshs. 1,000.00 Payment should either be by cash or banker’s cheque, payable to the 
cashier at the ﬁ nance department.

The documents may also be viewed/obtained/downloaded from our Corporate 
websites: ktb.go.ke/tender and www.magicalkenya.com/tender or IFMIS website: 
supplier.treasury.go.ke  free of charge. Bidders who download the tender document 
from the website must forward their particulars immediately to procurement@ktb.
go.ke for record purposes and any further tender clariﬁ cations and addenda.

The completed tenders in plain sealed envelopes clearly marked with Tender 
Number and Tender reference name; shall be addressed to:

CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER
KENYA TOURISM BOARD 
P.O. BOX 30630– 00100,
NAIROBI, KENYA
TEL:+254 20 2711262

and deposited in the tender box on 7th ﬂ oor, Kenya Re Towers, Ragati Road Upper 
Hill by on or before the closing date and time indicated in the table above. Tenders 
will be opened immediately thereafter in the presence of the tenderers’ or their 
representatives who choose to attend in the Board Room. 

Late tenders will not be accepted.

CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER

 Business & Personal

FX & Gaming Licenses
Swedish Trusts
Payment Processing 
Systems
Offshore Banks
Instant Citizenships & 
Residencies

www.global-money.com
www.gmccitizenships.com

SERVICED OFFICES IN MALTA

For a physical presence 
in Malta dedicated co-
working desks, private 
ofﬁ ces and meeting 
rooms are available 
to rent in the capital, 
Valletta.
Optional post scanning 
to individual online 
accounts.

Find us at www.GrandCentral.com.mt

Readers are recommended

to make appropr iate enquir ies and take appropr iate advice 
before sending money, incurr ing any expense or enter ing 
into a binding commitment in relation to an adver tisement.
The Economist Newspaper Limited shall not be liable to any 
person for loss or damage incurred or suf fered as a result of 
his/her accepting or of fer ing to accept an invitation 
contained in any adver tisement published in The Economist.
The Economist July 29th 2017

 
 
 
68

Economic and ﬁnancial indicators

The Economist July 29th 2017

Industr ial 
production 

Consumer pr ices Unemployment 
rate, % 

Current-account balance 

Currency units, per $

Economic data

Gross domestic product 

latest 

Statistics on 42 economies,
plus a closer look at South
Afr ica

Economic data

% change on year ago

+6.9 Q2 
+1.3 Q1 
+1.7 Q2 
+2.3 Q1 
+1.9 Q1 
+2.3 Q1 
+1.6 Q1 
+1.1 Q1 
+1.7 Q1 
+0.8 Q1 
+1.2 Q1 
+3.2 Q1 
+3.0 Q1 

United States +2.1 Q1 
China 
Japan 
Br itain 
Canada 
Euro area 
Austr ia 
Belgium 
France 
Germany 
Greece 
Italy 
Netherlands 
Spain 
Czech Republic +4.0 Q1 
Denmark 
Norway 
Poland 
Russia 
Sweden  
Switzerland 
Turkey 
Australia 
Hong Kong 
India 
Indonesia 
Malaysia 
Pakistan 
Philippines 
Singapore 
South Korea 
Taiwan 
Thailand 
Argentina 
Brazil 
Chile 
Colombia 
Mexico 
Venezuela 
Egypt 
Israel 
Saudi Arabia 
South Afr ica 

+3.6 Q1 
+2.6 Q1 
+4.4 Q1 
+0.5 Q1 
+2.2 Q1 
+1.1 Q1 
+5.0 Q1 
+1.7 Q1 
+4.3 Q1 
+6.1 Q1 
+5.0 Q1 
+5.6 Q1 

+6.4 Q1 
+2.5 Q2 
+2.7 Q2 
+2.6 Q1 
+3.3 Q1 
+0.3 Q1 
-0.4 Q1 
+0.1 Q1 
+1.1 Q1 
+2.8 Q1 
-8.8 Q4~ 
+4.3 Q1 
+4.0 Q1 
+1.7 2016 
+1.0 Q1 

+5.7 2017** 

qtr* 2017† 
+1.4 +2.2 
+7.0 +6.7 
+1.0 
+1.3 
+1.2 
+1.6 
+3.7 +2.3 
+2.0 
+1.9 
+5.7 
+1.8 
+2.6 
+1.6 
+1.9 
+1.5 
+2.4 
+1.8 
+1.8 
+1.0 
+1.8 
+1.1 
+1.7 +2.2 
+3.3 +2.9 
+6.3 +3.0 
+2.5 
+1.6 
+0.9 
+1.8 
+4.5 +3.6 
na 
+1.4 
+1.7 +2.6 
+1.1 
+1.4 
na +3.4 
+1.1 +2.4 
+2.9 +3.0 
+7.2 
+7.1 
na +5.2 
na +5.2 
na +5.7 
+4.5 +6.5 
+0.4 +2.9 
+2.4 +2.6 
+3.8 +2.4 
+5.2 +3.4 
+4.3 +2.5 
+4.3 +0.6 
+0.7 
+1.5 
-0.9 +2.0 
+2.7 +2.0 
-6.2 
-7.0 
na +3.5 
+1.4 
+4.1 
na 
-0.5 
-0.7 +0.7 

latest 
latest 
2017† 
+2.0 Jun 
+1.6 Jun 
+2.0 
+7.6 Jun 
+1.5 Jun 
+2.0 
+6.5 May 
+0.4 May 
+0.6 
-0.3 May 
+2.6 Jun 
+2.7 
+5.7 Apr 
+1.0 Jun 
+1.8 
+4.0 May 
+1.3 Jun 
+1.6 
+3.6 May 
+1.9 Jun 
+2.0 
+2.0 May 
+1.6 Jun 
+2.2 
+3.2 May 
+0.7 Jun 
+1.2 
+4.9 May 
+1.6 Jun 
+1.7 
+5.4 May 
+1.0 Jun 
+1.3 
+2.8 May 
+1.2 Jun 
+1.4 
+3.8 May 
+1.1 Jun 
+1.2 
+4.6 May 
+1.5 Jun 
+2.0 
+8.1 May 
+2.3 Jun 
+2.3 
+6.2 May 
+0.6 Jun 
+1.2 
-1.4 May 
+1.9 Jun 
+2.4 
+4.5 Jun 
+1.5 Jun 
+2.0 
+3.6 Jun 
+4.4 Jun 
+4.2 
+8.0 May 
+1.7 Jun 
+1.6 
-1.3 Q1 
+0.2 Jun 
+0.5 
+4.1 May +10.9 Jun 
+10.2 
-0.8 Q1 
+1.9 Q2 
+2.2 
+0.2 Q1 
+2.0 Jun 
+1.6 
+1.7 May 
+1.5 Jun 
+4.2 
+4.0 May 
+4.4 Jun 
+4.3 
+4.6 May 
+3.6 Jun 
+4.0 
+6.3 May 
+3.9 Jun 
+4.8 
+5.8 May 
+2.7 Jun 
+3.0 
+13.1 Jun 
+0.5 Jun 
+1.3 
+0.1 May 
+1.9 Jun 
+1.9 
+3.1 Jun 
+1.0 Jun 
+0.5 
+1.4 May 
nil Jun 
+0.7 
-2.5 Oct +21.9 Jun‡ +24.2 
+3.9 May 
+3.0 Jun 
+3.8 
+0.1 May 
+1.7 Jun 
+2.8 
-0.6 May 
+4.0 Jun 
+4.1 
+1.0 May 
+6.3 Jun 
+5.4 
+0.8 Sep 
na  
+569 
+25.1 May +29.8 Jun +22.5 
-1.5 May 
-0.2 Jun 
+0.5 
na  
-0.4 Jun 
+2.2 
-1.9 May 
+5.1 Jun 
+5.5 

latest 12 
months, $bn 
-449.3 Q1 
+169.5 Q1 
+188.6 May 
-99.8 Q1 
-48.4 Q1 
+388.6 May 
+6.4 Q1 
-4.2 Mar 
-22.4 May 
+272.4 May 
-0.9 May 
+48.6 May 
+68.4 Q1 
+21.1 Apr 
+1.4 Q1 
+26.1 May 
+22.4 Q1 
-2.2 May 
+33.6 Q2 
+22.0 Q1 
+73.6 Q1 
-35.3 May 
-25.0 Q1 
+14.8 Q1 
-15.2 Q1 
-14.6 Q1 
+6.6 Q1 
-12.1 Q2 
-0.4 Mar 
+59.0 Q1 
+88.3 May 
+69.1 Q1 
+45.1 Q1 
-16.8 Q1 
-14.3 Jun 
-5.0 Q1 
-11.9 Q1 
-22.0 Q1 
-17.8 Q3~ 
-18.0 Q1 
+11.7 Q1 
-1.0 Q1 
-7.9 Q1 

% of GDP 
2017† 
-2.6 
+1.6 
+3.6 
-3.1 
-2.6 
+3.1 
+2.3 
+0.3 
-1.2 
+8.0 
-1.2 
+2.1 
+9.4 
+1.8 
+0.9 
+7.7 
+7.6 
-0.8 
+2.2 
+4.8 
+9.9 
-4.4 
-1.6 
+5.8 
-1.2 
-1.7 
+3.6 
-3.6 
+0.4 
+19.1 
+6.0 
+12.8 
+11.5 
-2.8 
-1.0 
-1.4 
-3.6 
-2.2 
-1.1 
-5.8 
+4.1 
+1.3 
-3.2 

4.4 Jun 
4.0 Q1§ 
3.1 May 

4.5 Apr†† 

6.5 Jun 
9.3 May 
5.4 May 
7.6 Mar 
9.6 May 

3.9 May‡ 

21.7 Apr 
11.3 May 
6.0 Jun 
17.7 May 

3.0 May‡ 

4.3 May 

4.6 Apr‡‡ 
7.1 Jun§ 
5.1 Jun§ 
7.2 May§ 

3.2 Jun 
10.5 Apr§ 
5.6 Jun 

3.1 Jun‡‡ 
5.0 2015 

5.3 Q1§ 

3.4 May§ 
5.9 2015 

5.7 Q2§ 
2.2 Q1 

3.8 Jun§ 

3.8 Jun 

1.3 May§ 

9.2 Q1§ 
13.3 May§ 

7.0 May§‡‡ 
9.4 May§ 

3.3 Jun 

7.3 Apr§ 

12.0 Q1§ 
4.5 May 

5.6 2016 

27.7 Q1§ 

Budget 
balance 

Interest
rates, %

% of GDP 10-year gov't 
2017† 
bonds, latest 
-3.5 
2.32 
-4.1 
3.58§§ 
-5.1 
0.07 
-3.6 
1.21 
-2.4 
1.97 
-1.4 
0.55 
-1.1 
0.66 
-2.3 
0.82 
-3.1 
0.81 
+0.5 
0.55 
-1.3 
5.34 
-2.3 
2.12 
+0.7 
0.68 
-3.3 
1.59 
-0.5 
0.90 
-0.6 
0.68 
+4.2 
1.71 
-2.8 
3.34 
-2.1 
8.13 
+0.3 
0.66 
+0.2 
0.04 
-2.3 
10.62 
-1.8 
2.68 
+1.7 
1.55 
-3.2 
6.44 
-2.2 
6.79 
-3.0 
3.98 
-4.5 
8.10††† 
-2.8 
5.03 
-1.0 
2.11 
+0.9 
2.25 
-0.9 
1.07 
-2.3 
2.37 
-5.9 
na 
-7.8 
9.39 
-2.7 
4.28 
-3.2 
7.01 
-1.9 
6.83 
-19.5 
11.02 
-10.8 
na 
-2.6 
1.90 
-7.4 
3.68 
-3.2 
8.54 

Jul 26th 
- 
6.75 
112 
0.77 
1.25 
0.86 
0.86 
0.86 
0.86 
0.86 
0.86 
0.86 
0.86 
0.86 
22.4 
6.39 
7.99 
3.65 
59.9 
8.23 
0.96 
3.55 
1.26 
7.81 
64.4 
13,337 
4.28 
105 
50.7 
1.36 
1,122 
30.4 
33.5 
17.5 
3.17 
649 
3,033 
17.8 
10.2 
17.9 
3.57 
3.75 
13.0 

year ago
-
6.68
105
0.76
1.32
0.91
0.91
0.91
0.91
0.91
0.91
0.91
0.91
0.91
24.6
6.77
8.58
3.97
66.2
8.65
0.99
3.05
1.33
7.76
67.3
13,168
4.06
105
47.2
1.36
1,135
32.1
35.0
15.0
3.28
662
3,075
18.8
9.99
8.88
3.84
3.75
14.4

Source: Haver Analytics.  *% change on previous quar ter, annual rate. †The Economist poll or Economist Intelligence Unit estimate/forecast. §Not seasonally adjusted. ‡New ser ies. ~2014 **Year ending June. ††Latest 
3 months. ‡‡3-month moving average. §§5-year yield. †††Dollar-denominated bonds. 

 
 
 
 
The Economist July 29th 2017 

Economic and ﬁnancial indicators 69

Markets

Markets

3,243.1 
3,952.7 
5,190.2 
12,305.1 
830.2 
21,577.6 
527.7 
1,065.9 
1,011.9 
902.4 
35,564.9 
803.4 
62,362.3 
1,020.6 
1,580.2 
8,990.3 
107,206.1 
5,823.3 

% change on
Dec 30th 2016
Index 
one 
in local 
in $
Jul 26th week currency terms
21,711.0 
+0.3 
+9.9 
+9.9
3,401.4 
+0.5 
+4.7 
+7.7
20,050.2 
+0.1 
+4.9 
+9.3
7,452.3 
+0.3 
+4.3 +10.2
15,171.4 
-0.5 
-0.8 
+6.2
-0.3 
+7.6 +18.7
-0.3 
+6.1 
+17.0
+1.6 
+23.9 +36.6
+1.3 
+9.6 +20.9
-0.5 
+6.7 
+17.7
-1.2 
+7.2 +18.2
-2.7 
+29.0 +42.2
+0.5 
+12.2 +23.7
+0.7 
+9.2 +20.4
nil 
+13.0 +24.6
+0.4 
+9.8 +25.8
-1.1 
+13.0 +24.6
-0.6 
+11.1 +23.8
+0.9 
+5.1 +13.2
-0.3 
+20.5 
+37.6
-2.2 
-11.4 
-11.4
-1.8 
+4.2 +15.0
-0.4 
+9.4 +15.9
-0.2 
+37.2 +36.0
+0.8 
+1.8 +13.0
+1.0 
+22.5 +21.5
+1.3 
+21.6 +28.2
-0.1 
+9.5 +10.6
+0.5 
+7.6 +12.6
+1.1 
-4.0 
-4.8
+0.4 
+15.8 +22.9
+0.2 
+20.1 +29.3
-0.8 
+12.6 +19.5
+0.5 
+2.6 
+9.7
-1.2 
+25.3 +13.5
-0.3 
+7.9 +11.0
+0.2 
+21.5 +25.4
+0.3 
+8.0 
+6.9
+1.0 
+13.1 
+31.1
+2.5 
+325 
na
+0.7 
+11.8 +13.2
-0.3 
+2.1 
+10.1
-0.4 
-0.5 
-0.5
+1.4 
+8.3 +13.6

United States (DJIA) 
China (SSEA) 
Japan (Nikkei 225) 
Br itain (FTSE 100) 
Canada (S&P TSX) 
Euro area (FTSE Euro 100) 1,196.7 
Euro area (EURO STOXX 50) 3,491.2 
Austr ia (ATX) 
Belgium (Bel 20) 
France (CAC 40) 
Germany (DAX)* 
Greece (Athex Comp) 
Italy (FTSE/MIB) 
Netherlands (AEX) 
Spain (Madr id SE) 
Czech Republic (PX) 
Denmark (OMXCB) 
Hungary (BUX) 
Norway (OSEAX) 
Poland (WIG) 
Russia (RTS, $ terms) 
Sweden (OMXS30) 
Switzerland (SMI) 
Turkey (BIST) 
Australia (All Ord.) 
Hong Kong (Hang Seng) 26,941.0 
India (BSE) 
Indonesia (JSX) 
Malaysia (KLSE) 
Pakistan (KSE) 
Singapore (STI) 
South Korea (KOSPI) 
Taiwan (TWI)  
Thailand (SET) 
Argentina (MERV) 
Brazil (BVSP) 
Chile (IGPA) 
Colombia (IGBC) 
Mexico (IPC) 
Venezuela (IBC) 
Egypt (EGX 30) 
Israel (TA-125) 
Saudi Arabia (Tadawul) 
South Afr ica (JSE AS) 

32,382.5 
5,800.2 
1,766.0 
45,908.4 
3,336.7 
2,434.5 
10,419.1 
1,583.2 
21,202.9 
65,010.6 
25,190.4 
10,913.9 
51,600.3 
134,583.5 
13,797.3 
1,303.6 
7,200.4 
54,836.2 

South Afr ica’s economy

GDP growth has plummeted over the past
six years. Despite signiﬁcant social trans-
fers, which accounted for 16% of govern-
ment spending in 2016, inequality is r ife.
The top income quintile earns almost 40
times more than the bottom. A proposed
increase in the minimum wage should
reduce pover ty among low-skilled work-
ers. But the impact it will have on employ-
ment is unclear.

GDP, % increase on a year earlier

South Afr ica

OECD average 

2011

12

13

14

15

16

17*

3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0

Disposable income, ratio between the top and
bottom quintile

Ratio of minimum wage to median wage

2015 or latest

10

20

30

40

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

South Afr ica

OECD

Proposed

*Forecast

2015 or latest

0

South Afr ica

OECD

Source: OECD

Other markets

The Economist commodity-pr ice index

2005=100

The Economist commodity-price index

% change on
one 
one
Jul 25th* month 
year

Jul 18th 

144.4 
156.6 

131.7 
131.5 
131.8 

144.8 
154.4 

134.8 
133.3 
135.4 

+3.4 
+3.1 

+3.7 
+2.0 
+4.5 

+6.2
-0.9

+16.2
+5.9
+21.2

201.7 

201.8 

+1.2 

+6.8

155.0 

154.4 

nil 

+0.1

1,242.0 

1,250.6 

+0.3 

-5.3

West Texas Intermediate

$ per barrel 

46.4 

47.9 

+8.3 

+11.6

Sources: Bloomberg; CME Group; Cotlook; Darmenn & Curl; FT; ICCO;
ICO; ISO; Live Rice Index; LME; NZ Wool Ser vices; Thompson Lloyd & 
Ewar t; Thomson Reuters; Urner Barr y; WSJ.  *Provisional  
†Non-food agr iculturals.

329.8 
1,620.9 

Other markets

% change on
Dec 30th 2016
Index 
one 
in local 
in $
Jul 26th week currency terms
2,477.8 
+0.2 
+10.7 +10.7
+0.6 
+19.3 +19.3
+0.3 
-3.5 
-3.5
-0.1 
+6.7 +11.2
-0.6 
+5.3 +16.1
+0.2 
+12.0 +12.0
+0.2 
+23.2 +23.2
+0.2 
+13.2 +13.2
+0.2 
+5.5 
+5.5
-0.3 
+6.7 
+6.7
+0.2 
+3.6 
+3.6
+9.8 
+14.0 (levels)
-1.7 
-28.2 
-20.8
-2.1 
-16.9 
-16.9
-0.9 
-20.1 
-11.9

477.6 
932.8 
823.7 
1,246.3§ 
9.6 
51.8 
56.3 
5.3 

United States (S&P 500) 
United States (NAScomp) 6,422.8 
China (SSEB, $ terms) 
Japan (Topix) 
Europe (FTSEurof irst 300) 1,504.0 
World, dev'd (MSCI) 
Emerging markets (MSCI) 1,062.3 
World, all (MSCI) 
World bonds (Citigroup) 
EMBI+ (JPMorgan) 
Hedge funds (HFRX) 
Volatility, US (VIX) 
CDSs, Eur (iTRAXX)† 
CDSs, N Am (CDX)† 
Carbon trading (EU ETS) € 

1,961.9 

Sources: IHS Markit; Thomson Reuters.  *Total return index. 
†Credit-default-swap spreads, basis points. §Jul 25th.

Indicators for more countr ies and additional
Indicators for more countr ies and additional

ser ies, go to: Economist.com/indicators
ser ies, go to: Economist.com/indicators

Dollar Index

All Items 
Food 
Industr ials 
 All 
 Nfa† 
 Metals 

Sterling Index

All items 

Euro Index

All items 

Gold

$ per oz 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
70

Obituar y Ir ina Ratushinskaya

Written on soap

and here I go ﬂying down the steps—
almost in somersaults—as in a dream. 
And the day is springlike to the point of
madness,
...bluer than blue...

Irina Ratushinskaya, dissident and poet of the Soviet era, died on July 5th, aged 63
FOR her whole life, so it seemed to Irina
ran ravenously through Dostoevsky, Tol-
Ratushinskaya, people had been trying
stoy, Chekhov, Pushkin. And though she
to make her something she wasn’t. They
would never, never be a Soviet, what joy to
stopped her jumping around in her par-
be a compatriot of Pasternak, Mandelstam
ents’ ﬂat in Odessa, or sliding down the
and Akhmatova! When she ﬁrst read their
iron bannisters, in case the neighbours
poems she was knocked oﬀ her feet, deliri-
complained. She jumped and slid anyway,
ous, almost as if it was April again: 
scabs all over her legs. They tried to turn
her into a little Communist by making her
join the Komsomol and wear a red scarf.
She was disruptive all the time, her head
buzzing with silly rhymes. They forced her
to go to school and learn English, when she
wanted to go to the beach and race around
by the untamed sea, like the ownerless
dogs. She yearned to ﬂy, but they wouldn’t
let her try for a pilot’s licence—a weak reﬂex
in an ankle, they said. A lie, of course! So
many lies! She ﬂew in her dreams, though
as she grew older she tended to crash dis-
concertingly into high white cliﬀs. 
They tried to make her a patriotic citi-
zen of the Soviet Union, but how could she
be? It wasn’t her motherland. Her parents
were Polish, though they hid it; mustn’t
speak the language, mustn’t practise that
subversive Christianity! Her home was
Ukraine, though she could not speak Uk-
rainian. Visiting Russia for the ﬁrst time,
quite grown-up, she found the much-sung
birch trees didn’t move her. But the lan-
guage did, and had from childhood, as she

She could not possibly be a Soviet poet. A
contradiction in terms! They tried to make
her one: if she wrote a poem in praise of
the party and another in praise of Lenin,
she could win her oﬃcial laurels. She
wasn’t interested. Her themes were free-
dom and oppression: growing by breath-
ing, as she put it, daring to say her verses
out loud, even though “It’s a family trait/of
Russian poets to be shot at”. She talked to
God, too; having been told to be an atheist,
she was naturally the reverse, because
with faith her soul could never be manipu-
lated. Deﬁantly, she and her husband Igor
Geraschenko got these pernicious things
published in samizdat and abroad, spread-
ing evil propaganda and weakening the re-
gime. In 1983 she was sentenced to a labour
camp for seven years and internal exile for

The Economist July 29th 2017

ﬁve, as a very dangerous criminal. 
Cowed now? Of course not! She wrote
more than ever, scratching poems with
charred matches into bars of soap, crowd-
ing tiny letters on to cigarette paper to roll
up and smuggle out, hiding scraps under
the piles of gloves she spent her days sew-
ing. Her best work was inspired by a re-
gime of gruel and black bread, of beatings
and freezing cold in isolation cells, where
she would huddle in her thin useless dress
against the icy pipes. In all she spent four
months in isolation, and many weeks on
hunger strike, rather than wear a badge
with her name and number on it. That she
utterly refused to do!
Indomitable as she was, she found
plenty to delight her in prison. She cher-
ished the other brave, resourceful women
in the camp’s “Small Zone” (“our little ship
…an eggshell/covered in patches and
scars”), who improved the stomach-turn-
ing food with clippings of chives from the
plot they carefully tilled, who sewed their
rags to look presentable for visitors, and
who sustained each other. She celebrated
Nyurka, the prison cat, who brought her an
especially plump mouse when she was on
hunger strike, meaning her to eat it. When
she asked a junior guard to sharpen her
pencil, was she not a queen? Queen of tiny
things. One small pane of glass, covered in
frost, produced a blue radiance of trees and
ﬂames more beautiful than she had ever
seen. One caramel, stealthily slipped into
her pocket by some other prisoner, was the
best she had ever tasted. 
Nonetheless, she got weak and ill, and
because the world cared about her she was
released on Mikhail Gorbachev’s orders
after three years, on the eve of the Reykja-
vik summit. Brought to the West for medi-
cal treatment, she and Igor ended up stay-
ing 12 years in Britain, still campaigning.

Sparrows in the frost
For the ﬁrst time in her life, she could be
herself. Yet as the invitations came in—to
write, to lecture, to teach at Northwestern
University in Illinois—she felt forced into a
template again, the celebrity dissident
abroad. It didn’t suit her. For all its horrors,
the Soviet Union had nourished her poet-
ry. She needed to return, even though

The angels of Russia
Freeze to death towards morning
Like sparrows in the frost
Falling from their wires into the snow.

Besides, she wanted her twin sons to be
brought up as Russians, in the beauty of
the language. And so they went back.
Life was comfortable enough. But she
reﬂected that the most vivid dreams she
had ever had, full of delicious aromas and
wonderful music, were those that came to
her in the isolation cell. And there, too, she
really ﬂew! As eﬀortlessly as a bird. 7

NEW REPORT NOW AVAILABLE

FROM THE

Advancing Financial Inclusion in a Digital Age 

“The impact of the digital age on ﬁnancial inclusion is arguably the 
greatest ﬁnancial reform of our time,” says Michelle Curry, the CEO of FDC. 

The 2017 Asia-Paciﬁc Financial Inclusion Summit brought together more than 450 thought 
leaders in the inclusive ﬁnance ecosystem to drive collective and positive change for 
greater ﬁnancial inclusion across the region. Now in its second year, the Summit was 
hosted by the State Bank of Vietnam and organised by the Citi Foundation and FDC, in 
partnership with BWTP and The Economist Group. 

Themed Advancing Financial Inclusion in a Digital Age, the Summit explored the 

opportunities and challenges of the next generation of ﬁnancial inclusion, and showcased 
the latest technology and innovations in ﬁnancial products and services for the unbanked 
and underserved.

Download the Asia-Paciﬁc Financial Inclusion Summit Summary Report at:

www.ﬁninclusionsummit.org

